DR1: IEEE Trans Nanobioscience. 2003 Dec;2(4):193-201. 

A novel approach for high-quality microarray processing using third-dye array
visualization technology.

Wang X, Jiang N, Feng X, Xie Y, Tonellato PJ, Ghosh S, Hessner MJ.

Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
xujing@mcw.edu

Historically, microarray image processing has been technically challenging in
obtaining quality gene expression data. After hybridization of Cy3- and
Cy5-labeled samples, images are collected and processed to obtain gene
expression ratio measurements for each of the elements on the array. The
hybridization process often brings in contaminating noise, which can make
correct identification of the signal difficult. In addition, spot intensity
levels are highly variable due to the expression differences of different genes,
and weak spots are often difficult to detect. These conditions are further
complicated by inherent irregularities in spot position, shape, and size
commonly found on high-density microarrays, making image processing an often
labor-intensive task that is difficult to reliably automate. We previously
reported a novel third-dye array visualization (TDAV) technology that allows
prehybridization visualization and quality control of printed arrays. Here, we
present a new microarray image processing approach utilizing TDAV. By
incorporating the third-dye image, we show that overall quality of the
microarray data is significantly improved, and automation of processing is
feasible and reliable. Furthermore, we demonstrate use of the third-dye image to
better quality control microarray image analysis. Both the principle and
implementation of the approach are presented in detail, with experimental
results.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 15376909 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR2: J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2003 Oct;1(3):541-86. 

Computational strategies for analyzing data in gene expression microarray
experiments.

Aittokallio T, Kurki M, Nevalainen O, Nikula T, West A, Lahesmaa R.

Department of Computational Biology, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha,
Kashiwa-Shi, Chiba 277-8562, Japan. jun@gi.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Microarray analysis has become a widely used method for generating gene
expression data on a genomic scale. Microarrays have been enthusiastically
applied in many fields of biological research, even though several open
questions remain about the analysis of such data. A wide range of approaches are
available for computational analysis, but no general consensus exists as to
standard for microarray data analysis protocol. Consequently, the choice of data
analysis technique is a crucial element depending both on the data and on the
goals of the experiment. Therefore, basic understanding of bioinformatics is
required for optimal experimental design and meaningful interpretation of the
results. This review summarizes some of the common themes in DNA microarray data
analysis, including data normalization and detection of differential expression.
Algorithms are demonstrated by analyzing cDNA microarray data from an experiment
monitoring gene expression in T helper cells. Several computational biology
strategies, along with their relative merits, are overviewed and potential areas
for additional research discussed. The goal of the review is to provide a
computational framework for applying and evaluating such bioinformatics
strategies. Solid knowledge of microarray informatics contributes to the
implementation of more efficient computational protocols for the given data
obtained through microarray experiments.

Publication Types:
    Review

PMID: 15290769 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR3: Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Apr;2(1):31-6. 

Strategies for microarray analysis of limiting amounts of RNA.

Livesey FJ.

Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute, Cambridge, UK. rick@welc.cam.ac.uk

One of the critical limitations of current microarray technologies for use in
expression analyses is the relatively large amount of input RNA required to
generate labelled cDNA populations for array analysis. In situations where RNA
is limiting, the options for expression profiling are to increase cDNA labelling
and hybridisation efficiency, or to use an amplification strategy to generate
enough RNA/cDNA for use with a standard labelling method. Sample amplification
approaches must preserve the representation of the relative abundances of the
different RNAs within the starting population and must also be highly
reproducible. This review evaluates current signal and sample amplification
technologies, including those that can be used to generate labelled cDNA
populations for array analysis from as little as a single cell.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 15239941 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR4: Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Apr;2(1):7-20. 

Comment in:
    Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Apr;2(1):4-6.

Resource and hardware options for microarray-based experimentation.

Affara NA.

Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK. na106@cam.ac.uk

DNA microarray technology permits the study of biological systems and processes
on a genome-wide scale. Arrays based on cDNA clones, oligonucleotides and
genomic clones have been developed for investigations of gene expression,
genetic analysis and genomic changes associated with disease. Over the past 3-4
years, microarrays have become more widely available to the research community.
This has occurred through increased commercial availability of custom and
generic arrays and the development of robotic equipment that has enabled array
printing and analysis facilities to be established in academic research
institutions. This brief review examines the public and commercial resources,
the microarray fabrication and data capture and analysis equipment currently
available to the user.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 15239939 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR5: Appl Bioinformatics. 2003;2(4):241-4. 

MicroPreP: a cDNA microarray data pre-processing framework.

van Hijum SA, Garcia de la Nava J, Trelles O, Kok J, Kuipers OP.

Molecular Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and
Biotechnology Institute, Haren, The Netherlands. s.a.f.t.van.hijum@biol.rug.nl

The user-friendly MicroPreP framework was developed to transform raw intensity
data from cDNA microarrays into high-quality data. The main features of this
software are: LOWESS normalisation; merging of DNA microarray data from changing
slide versions; outlier detection; and slide quality assessment.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 15130795 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR6: Appl Bioinformatics. 2003;2(4):219-28. 

Clinically validated benchmarking of normalisation techniques for two-colour
oligonucleotide spotted microarray slides.

Listgarten J, Graham K, Damaraju S, Cass C, Mackey J, Zanke B.

PolyomX Program, Cross Cancer Institute, University of Alberta, Alberta Cancer
Board, Edmonton, AB, Canada. jenn@cs.toronto.ca

Acquisition of microarray data is prone to systematic errors. A correction,
called normalisation, must be applied to the data before further analysis is
performed. With many normalisation techniques published and in use, the best way
of executing this correction remains an open question. In this study, a variety
of single-slide normalisation techniques, and different parameter settings for
these techniques, were compared over many replicated microarray experiments.
Different normalisation techniques were assessed through the distribution of the
standard deviation of replicates from one biological sample across different
slides. It is shown that local normalisation outperformed global normalisation,
and intensity-based 'LOWESS' outperformed trimmed mean and median normalisation
techniques. Overall, the top performing normalisation technique was a
print-tip-based LOWESS with zero robust iterations. Lastly, we validated this
evaluation methodology by examining the ability to predict oestrogen
receptor-positive and -negative breast cancer samples with data that had been
normalised using different techniques.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 15130793 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR7: Appl Bioinformatics. 2003;2(4):197-208. 

Overcoming confounded controls in the analysis of gene expression data from
microarray experiments.

Bhattacharya S, Long D, Lyons-Weiler J.

Center for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15232, USA.

A potential limitation of data from microarray experiments exists when improper
control samples are used. In cancer research, comparisons of tumour expression
profiles to those from normal samples is challenging due to tissue heterogeneity
(mixed cell populations). A specific example exists in a published colon cancer
dataset, in which tissue heterogeneity was reported among the normal samples. In
this paper, we show how to overcome or avoid the problem of using normal samples
that do not derive from the same tissue of origin as the tumour. We advocate an
exploratory unsupervised bootstrap analysis that can reveal unexpected and
undesired, but strongly supported, clusters of samples that reflect tissue
differences instead of tumour versus normal differences. All of the algorithms
used in the analysis, including the maximum difference subset algorithm,
unsupervised bootstrap analysis, pooled variance t-test for finding
differentially expressed genes and the jackknife to reduce false positives, are
incorporated into our online Gene Expression Data Analyzer ( http://
bioinformatics.upmc.edu/GE2/GEDA.html ).

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 15130791 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR8: Appl Bioinformatics. 2003;2(4):193-5. 

Profound normalisation challenges remain in the analysis of data from microarray
experiments.

Lyons-Weiler J.

Publication Types:
    Editorial

PMID: 15130790 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR9: Biotechnol Bioeng. 2003 Dec 30;84(7):795-800. 

Maintaining data integrity in microarray data management.

Grant GR, Manduchi E, Pizarro A, Stoeckert CJ Jr.

Penn Center for Bioinformatics (PCBI), University of Pennsylvania, 1429 Blockley
Hall, 423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6021, USA.
ggrant@grant.org

Gene expression microarrays are a relatively new technology, dating back just a
few years, yet they have already become a very widely used tool in biology, and
have evolved to a wide range of applications well beyond their original design
intent. However, while the use of microarrays has expanded, and the issues of
performance optimization have been intensively studied, the fundamental issue of
data integrity management has largely been ignored. Now that performance has
improved so greatly, the shortcomings of data integrity control methods
constitute a greater percent of the stumbling blocks for investigators.
Microarray data are cumbersome, and the rule up to this point has mostly been
one of hands-on transformations, leading to human errors which often have
dramatic consequences. We show in this review that the time lost on such
mistakes is enormous and dramatically affects results; therefore, mistakes
should be mitigated in any way possible. We outline the scope of the data
integrity issue, to survey some of the most common and dangerous data
transformations, and their shortcomings. To illustrate, we review some case
studies. We then look at the work done by the research community on this issue
(which admittedly is meager up to this point). Some data integrity issues are
always going to be difficult, while others will become easier-one of our goals
is to expedite the use of integrity control methods. Finally, we present some
preliminary guidelines and some specific approaches that we believe should be
the focus of future research. Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 14708120 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR10: Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Nov;1005:284-7. 

The design of a gene chip for functional immunological studies on a high-quality
control platform.

Waukau J, Jailwala P, Wang Y, Khoo HJ, Ghosh S, Wang X, Hessner MJ.

Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College and Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53226, USA.

We have created an immunology-related microarray chip containing primarily known
genes with well-studied functional properties. By looking at known genes rather
than expressed sequence tags, we hope to gain a better understanding of
immunological pathways and how they work. The immunology gene chip contains
genes from the following functional categories: T cell genes; B cell genes;
dendritic cell genes; chemokine and cytokine genes; apoptosis genes; cell cycle
genes; cell interaction genes; general hematology and immunology genes; and
adhesion genes. We have also developed a novel three-color cDNA array platform
in which arrays are directly visualized before hybridization, which allows us to
select only high-quality chips for our experiments. In an effort to provide
quantitative quality control for each array element as well as the entire chip,
we have developed Matarray, a software package for image processing and data
acquisition. With Matarray, we have built a quantitative data filtering and
normalization scheme that has proved to be more efficient than the existing
methods. The list of immunology chip genes is available from the authors.

PMID: 14679077 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR11: Anal Chem. 2003 Sep 1;75(17):4672-5. 

Effects of atmospheric ozone on microarray data quality.

Fare TL, Coffey EM, Dai H, He YD, Kessler DA, Kilian KA, Koch JE, LeProust E,
Marton MJ, Meyer MR, Stoughton RB, Tokiwa GY, Wang Y.

Rosetta Inpharmatics LLC, 12040 115th Avenue NE, Kirkland, Washington 98034,
USA.

A data anomaly was observed that affected the uniformity and reproducibility of
fluorescent signal across DNA microarrays. Results from experimental sets
designed to identify potential causes (from microarray production to array
scanning) indicated that the anomaly was linked to a batch process; further work
allowed us to localize the effect to the posthybridization array stringency
washes. Ozone levels were monitored and highly correlated with the batch effect.
Controlled exposures of microarrays to ozone confirmed this factor as the root
cause, and we present data that show susceptibility of a class of cyanine dyes
(e.g., Cy5, Alexa 647) to ozone levels as low as 5-10 ppb for periods as short
as 10-30 s. Other cyanine dyes (e.g., Cy3, Alexa 555) were not significantly
affected until higher ozone levels (> 100 ppb). To address this environmental
effect, laboratory ozone levels should be kept below 2 ppb (e.g., with filters
in HVAC) to achieve high quality microarray data.

PMID: 14632079 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR12: Bioinformatics. 2003 Nov 1;19(16):2088-96. 

A Bayesian missing value estimation method for gene expression profile data.

Oba S, Sato MA, Takemasa I, Monden M, Matsubara K, Ishii S.

Graduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma 630-0192, Japan.

MOTIVATION: Gene expression profile analyses have been used in numerous studies
covering a broad range of areas in biology. When unreliable measurements are
excluded, missing values are introduced in gene expression profiles. Although
existing multivariate analysis methods have difficulty with the treatment of
missing values, this problem has received little attention. There are many
options for dealing with missing values, each of which reaches drastically
different results. Ignoring missing values is the simplest method and is
frequently applied. This approach, however, has its flaws. In this article, we
propose an estimation method for missing values, which is based on Bayesian
principal component analysis (BPCA). Although the methodology that a
probabilistic model and latent variables are estimated simultaneously within the
framework of Bayes inference is not new in principle, actual BPCA implementation
that makes it possible to estimate arbitrary missing variables is new in terms
of statistical methodology. RESULTS: When applied to DNA microarray data from
various experimental conditions, the BPCA method exhibited markedly better
estimation ability than other recently proposed methods, such as singular value
decomposition and K-nearest neighbors. While the estimation performance of
existing methods depends on model parameters whose determination is difficult,
our BPCA method is free from this difficulty. Accordingly, the BPCA method
provides accurate and convenient estimation for missing values. AVAILABILITY:
The software is available at http://hawaii.aist-nara.ac.jp/~shige-o/tools/.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 14594714 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR13: Bioinformatics. 2003 Nov 1;19(16):2031-8. 

A novel strategy for microarray quality control using Bayesian networks.

Hautaniemi S, Edgren H, Vesanen P, Wolf M, Jarvinen AK, Yli-Harja O, Astola J,
Kallioniemi O, Monni O.

Institute of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, PO Box 553,
33101 Tampere, Finland. sampsa.hautaniemi@tut.fi

MOTIVATION: High-throughput microarray technologies enable measurements of the
expression levels of thousands of genes in parallel. However, microarray
printing, hybridization and washing may create substantial variability in the
quality of the data. As erroneous measurements may have a drastic impact on the
results by disturbing the normalization schemes and by introducing expression
patterns that lead to incorrect conclusions, it is crucial to discard low
quality observations in the early phases of a microarray experiment. A typical
microarray experiment consists of tens of thousands of spots on a microarray,
making manual extraction of poor quality spots impossible. Thus, there is a need
for a reliable and general microarray spot quality control strategy. RESULTS: We
suggest a novel strategy for spot quality control by using Bayesian networks,
which contain many appealing properties in the spot quality control context. We
illustrate how a non-linear least squares based Gaussian fitting procedure can
be used in order to extract features for a spot on a microarray. The features we
used in this study are: spot intensity, size of the spot, roundness of the spot,
alignment error, background intensity, background noise, and bleeding. We
conclude that Bayesian networks are a reliable and useful model for microarray
spot quality assessment. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
http://sigwww.cs.tut.fi/TICSP/SpotQuality/.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 14594707 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR14: OMICS. 2003 Fall;7(3):227-34. 

A software package for cDNA microarray data normalization and assessing
confidence intervals.

Hyduke DR, Rohlin L, Kao KC, Liao JC.

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California at Los Angeles,
California, USA.

DNA microarray data are affected by variations from a number of sources. Before
these data can be used to infer biological information, the extent of these
variations must be assessed. Here we describe an open source software package,
lcDNA, that provides tools for filtering, normalizing, and assessing the
statistical significance of cDNA microarray data. The program employs a
hierarchical Bayesian model and Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation to estimate
gene-specific confidence intervals for each gene in a cDNA microarray data set.
This program is designed to perform these primary analytical operations on data
from two-channel spotted, or in situ synthesized, DNA microarrays.

PMID: 14583113 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR15: Biotechniques. 2003 Oct;35(4):828-35. 

Optimizing stringency for expression microarrays.

Korkola JE, Estep AL, Pejavar S, DeVries S, Jensen R, Waldman FM.

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

While several studies have reported methods to optimize expression microarray
protocols, none have dealt directly with hybridization wash stringency. We
designed a series of experiments to determine the optimal stringency conditions
for microarray experiments, using reproducibility and magnitudes of log2
(test/reference) ratio values as measures of quality. Low-stringency wash
conditions of cell line hybridizations led to nonspecific binding, resulting in
increased intensities, decreased magnitude of ratios, and poor reproducibility.
Relatively high-stringency wash conditions were found to give the best
reproducibility and large magnitude ratio changes, although increasing the
stringency beyond this point led to lower magnitude ratios and poorer
reproducibility. The expression levels of the ERBB2 oncogene in the BT474 versus
MCF7 cell lines showed that high-stringency wash conditions gave the best
agreement with real-time quantitative PCR, although the magnitude of the changes
by microarray was smaller than for real-time quantitative PCR. Analysis of a
series of cell lines washed at the optimized stringency indicated that the rank
order of relative expression levels for ERBB2 microarray clones agreed well with
the rank order of ERBB2 levels, as measured by quantitative PCR. These results
indicate that the optimization of stringency conditions will improve microarray
reproducibility and give more representative expression values.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 14579749 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR16: Physiol Genomics. 2003 Dec 16;16(1):107-18. 

Transcriptome profiling of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant with a
constitutively activated Ras/cAMP pathway.

Jones DL, Petty J, Hoyle DC, Hayes A, Ragni E, Popolo L, Oliver SG, Stateva LI.

Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Manchester Institute of
Science and Technology, Manchester M60 1QD, United Kingdom.

Often changes in gene expression levels have been considered significant only
when above/below some arbitrarily chosen threshold. We investigated the effect
of applying a purely statistical approach to microarray analysis and
demonstrated that small changes in gene expression have biological significance.
Whole genome microarray analysis of a pde2Delta mutant, constructed in the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference strain FY23, revealed altered expression of
approximately 11% of protein encoding genes. The mutant, characterized by
constitutive activation of the Ras/cAMP pathway, has increased sensitivity to
stress, reduced ability to assimilate nonfermentable carbon sources, and some
cell wall integrity defects. Applying the Munich Information Centre for Protein
Sequences (MIPS) functional categories revealed increased expression of genes
related to ribosome biogenesis and downregulation of genes in the cell rescue,
defense, cell death and aging category, suggesting a decreased response to
stress conditions. A reduced level of gene expression in the unfolded protein
response pathway (UPR) was observed. Cell wall genes whose expression was
affected by this mutation were also identified. Several of the cAMP-responsive
orphan genes, upon further investigation, revealed cell wall functions; others
had previously unidentified phenotypes assigned to them. This investigation
provides a statistical global transcriptome analysis of the cellular response to
constitutive activation of the Ras/cAMP pathway.

PMID: 14570984 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR17: Bioinformatics. 2003 Sep 22;19(14):1846-8. 

A tool-kit for cDNA microarray and promoter analysis.

Shah NH, King DC, Shah PN, Fedoroff NV.

The Huck Institute of Life Sciences and The Department of Biology, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. nigam@psu.edu

We describe two sets of programs for expediting routine tasks in analysis of
cDNA microarray data and promoter sequences. The first set permits bad data
points to be flagged with respect to a number of parameters and performs
normalization in three different ways. It allows combining of result files into
comprehensive data sets, evaluation of the quality of both technical and
biological replicates and row and/or column standardization of data matrices.
The second set supports mapping ESTs in the genome, identifying the
corresponding genes and recovering their promoters, analyzing promoters for
transcription factor binding sites, and visual representation of the results.
The programs are designed primarily for Arabidopsis thaliana researchers, but
can be adapted readily for other model systems. Availability and Supplementary
information: http://www.personal.psu.edu/nhs109/Programs/

PMID: 14512358 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR18: Bioinformatics. 2003 Sep 22;19(14):1808-16. 

Controlling false-negative errors in microarray differential expression
analysis: a PRIM approach.

Cole SW, Galic Z, Zack JA.

Department of Medicine, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen School
of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1678, USA. coles@ucla.edu

MOTIVATION: Theoretical considerations suggest that current microarray screening
algorithms may fail to detect many true differences in gene expression (Type II
analytic errors). We assessed 'false negative' error rates in differential
expression analyses by conventional linear statistical models (e.g. t-test),
microarray-adapted variants (e.g. SAM, Cyber-T), and a novel strategy based on
hold-out cross-validation. The latter approach employs the machine-learning
algorithm Patient Rule Induction Method (PRIM) to infer minimum thresholds for
reliable change in gene expression from Boolean conjunctions of fold-induction
and raw fluorescence measurements. RESULTS: Monte Carlo analyses based on four
empirical data sets show that conventional statistical models and their
microarray-adapted variants overlook more than 50% of genes showing significant
up-regulation. Conjoint PRIM prediction rules recover approximately twice as
many differentially expressed transcripts while maintaining strong control over
false-positive (Type I) errors. As a result, experimental replication rates
increase and total analytic error rates decline. RT-PCR studies confirm that
gene inductions detected by PRIM but overlooked by other methods represent true
changes in mRNA levels. PRIM-based conjoint inference rules thus represent an
improved strategy for high-sensitivity screening of DNA microarrays.
AVAILABILITY: Freestanding JAVA application at
http://microarray.crump.ucla.edu/focus

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 14512352 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR19: Stem Cells. 2003;21(5):575-87. 

Designing, testing, and validating a focused stem cell microarray for
characterization of neural stem cells and progenitor cells.

Luo Y, Cai J, Ginis I, Sun Y, Lee S, Yu SX, Hoke A, Rao M.

Laboratory of Neurosciences, Gerontology Research Center, National Institute on
Aging, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Fetal neural stem cells (NSCs) have received great attention not only for their
roles in normal development but also for their potential use in the treatment of
neurodegenerative disorders. To develop a robust method of assessing the state
of stem cells, we have designed, tested, and validated a rodent NSC array. This
array consists of 260 genes that include cell type-specific markers for
embryonic stem (ES) cells and neural progenitor cells as well as growth factors,
cell cycle-related genes, and extracellular matrix molecules known to regulate
NSC biology. The 500-bp polymerase chain reaction products amplified and
validated by using gene-specific primers were arrayed along with positive
controls. Blanks were included for quality control, and some genes were arrayed
in duplicate. No cross-hybridization was detected. The quality of the arrays and
their sensitivity were also examined by using probes prepared by conventional
reverse transcriptase or by using amplified probes prepared by linear polymerase
replication (LPR). Both methods showed good reproducibility, and probes prepared
by LPR labeling appeared to detect expression of a larger proportion of
expressed genes. Expression detected by either method could be verified by
RT-PCR with high reproducibility. Using these stem cell chips, we have profiled
liver, ES, and neural cells. The cell types could be readily distinguished from
each other. Nine markers specific to mouse ES cells and 17 markers found in
neural cells were verified as robust markers of the stem cell state. Thus, this
focused neural stem array provides a convenient and useful tool for detection
and assessment of NSCs and progenitor cells and can reliably distinguish them
from other cell populations.

Publication Types:
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12968112 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR20: Bioinformatics. 2003 Sep 1;19(13):1620-7. 

The effect of replication on gene expression microarray experiments.

Pavlidis P, Li Q, Noble WS.

Columbia Genome Center, Columbia University, 1150 St Nicholas Avenue, New York,
NY 10032, USA. pp175@columbia.edu

MOTIVATION: We examine the effect of replication on the detection of apparently
differentially expressed genes in gene expression microarray experiments. Our
analysis is based on a random sampling approach using real data sets from 16
published studies. We consider both the ability to find genes that meet
particular statistical criteria as well as the stability of the results in the
face of changing levels of replication. RESULTS: While dependent on the data
source, our findings suggest that stable results are typically not obtained
until at least five biological replicates have been used. Conversely, for most
studies, 10-15 replicates yield results that are quite stable, and there is less
improvement in stability as the number of replicates is further increased. Our
methods will be of use in evaluating existing data sets and in helping to design
new studies.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12967957 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR21: BMC Bioinformatics. 2003 Sep 10;4(1):40. 

Probabilistic estimation of microarray data reliability and underlying gene
expression.

Bilke S, Breslin T, Sigvardsson M.

Complex Systems Division, Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Lund,
Solvegatan 14A, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. sven@thep.lu.se

BACKGROUND: The availability of high throughput methods for measurement of mRNA
concentrations makes the reliability of conclusions drawn from the data and
global quality control of samples and hybridization important issues. We address
these issues by an information theoretic approach, applied to discretized
expression values in replicated gene expression data. RESULTS: Our approach
yields a quantitative measure of two important parameter classes: First, the
probability P(sigma|S) that a gene is in the biological state sigma in a certain
variety, given its observed expression S in the samples of that variety. Second,
sample specific error probabilities which serve as consistency indicators of the
measured samples of each variety. The method and its limitations are tested on
gene expression data for developing murine B-cells and a t-test is used as
reference. On a set of known genes it performs better than the t-test despite
the crude discretization into only two expression levels. The consistency
indicators, i.e. the error probabilities, correlate well with variations in the
biological material and thus prove efficient. CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method
is effective in determining differential gene expression and sample reliability
in replicated microarray data. Already at two discrete expression levels in each
sample, it gives a good explanation of the data and is comparable to standard
techniques.

Publication Types:
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12967349 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR22: BMC Bioinformatics. 2003 Sep 8;4(1):37. 

Sex genes for genomic analysis in human brain: internal controls for comparison
of probe level data extraction.

Galfalvy HC, Erraji-Benchekroun L, Smyrniotopoulos P, Pavlidis P, Ellis SP, Mann
JJ, Sibille E, Arango V.

Department of Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY
10032, USA. hanga@neuron.cpmc.columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Genomic studies of complex tissues pose unique analytical challenges
for assessment of data quality, performance of statistical methods used for data
extraction, and detection of differentially expressed genes. Ideally, to assess
the accuracy of gene expression analysis methods, one needs a set of genes which
are known to be differentially expressed in the samples and which can be used as
a "gold standard". We introduce the idea of using sex-chromosome genes as an
alternative to spiked-in control genes or simulations for assessment of
microarray data and analysis methods. RESULTS: Expression of sex-chromosome
genes were used as true internal biological controls to compare alternate
probe-level data extraction algorithms (Microarray Suite 5.0 [MAS5.0], Model
Based Expression Index [MBEI] and Robust Multi-array Average [RMA]), to assess
microarray data quality and to establish some statistical guidelines for
analyzing large-scale gene expression. These approaches were implemented on a
large new dataset of human brain samples. RMA-generated gene expression values
were markedly less variable and more reliable than MAS5.0 and MBEI-derived
values. A statistical technique controlling the false discovery rate was applied
to adjust for multiple testing, as an alternative to the Bonferroni method, and
showed no evidence of false negative results. Fourteen probesets, representing
nine Y- and two X-chromosome linked genes, displayed significant sex differences
in brain prefrontal cortex gene expression. CONCLUSION: In this study, we have
demonstrated the use of sex genes as true biological internal controls for
genomic analysis of complex tissues, and suggested analytical guidelines for
testing alternate oligonucleotide microarray data extraction protocols and for
adjusting multiple statistical analysis of differentially expressed genes. Our
results also provided evidence for sex differences in gene expression in the
brain prefrontal cortex, supporting the notion of a putative direct role of
sex-chromosome genes in differentiation and maintenance of sexual dimorphism of
the central nervous system. Importantly, these analytical approaches are
applicable to all microarray studies that include male and female human or
animal subjects.

PMID: 12962547 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR23: Am J Pharmacogenomics. 2003;3(4):279-90. 

Assessing the variability in GeneChip data.

Huang S, Qian HR, Geringer C, Love C, Gelbert L, Bemis K.

Genomic Informatics, Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA.
huang_shuguang@lilly.com

INTRODUCTION: Oligonucleotide and cDNA microarray experiments are now common
practice in biological science research. The goal of these experiments is
generally to gain clues about the functions of genes by measuring how their
expression levels rise and fall in response to changing experimental conditions.
Measures of gene expression are affected, however, by a variety of factors. This
paper introduces statistical methods to assess the variability of Affymetrix
GeneChip data due to randomness. METHODS: The variation of Affymetrix's GeneChip
signal data are quantified at both chip level and individual gene level,
respectively, by the agreement study method and variance components method.
Three agreement measurement methods are introduced to assess the variability
among chips. Variation sources for gene expression data are decomposed into four
categories: systematic experiment variation, treatment effect, biological
variation, and chip variation. The focus of this paper is on evaluating and
comparing the last two kinds of variations. RESULTS: Measurement of agreement
and variance components methods were applied to an experimental data, and the
calculation and interpretation were exemplified. The variability between
biological samples were shown to exist and were assessed at both the chip level
and individual gene level. Using the variance components method, it was found
that the biological and chip variation are roughly comparable. The Statistical
Analysis System (SAS) program for doing the agreement studies can be obtained
from the correspondence author.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 12930160 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR24: DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;22(6):357-94. 

The design and analysis of microarray experiments: applications in parasitology.

Morrison DA, Ellis JT.

Department of Parasitology (SWEPAR), National Veterinary Institute and Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Microarray experiments can generate enormous amounts of data, but large datasets
are usually inherently complex, and the relevant information they contain can be
difficult to extract. For the practicing biologist, we provide an overview of
what we believe to be the most important issues that need to be addressed when
dealing with microarray data. In a microarray experiment we are simply trying to
identify which genes are the most "interesting" in terms of our experimental
question, and these will usually be those that are either overexpressed or
underexpressed (upregulated or downregulated) under the experimental conditions.
Analysis of the data to find these genes involves first preprocessing of the raw
data for quality control, including filtering of the data (e.g., detection of
outlying values) followed by standardization of the data (i.e., making the data
uniformly comparable throughout the dataset). This is followed by the formal
quantitative analysis of the data, which will involve either statistical
hypothesis testing or multivariate pattern recognition. Statistical hypothesis
testing is the usual approach to "class comparison," where several experimental
groups are being directly compared. The best approach to this problem is to use
analysis of variance, although issues related to multiple hypothesis testing and
probability estimation still need to be evaluated. Pattern recognition can
involve "class prediction," for which a range of supervised multivariate
techniques are available, or "class discovery," for which an even broader range
of unsupervised multivariate techniques have been developed. Each technique has
its own limitations, which need to be kept in mind when making a choice from
among them. To put these ideas in context, we provide a detailed examination of
two specific examples of the analysis of microarray data, both from
parasitology, covering many of the most important points raised.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12906732 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR25: Mol Pathol. 2003 Aug;56(4):198-204. 

Demystified...tissue microarray technology.

Packeisen J, Korsching E, Herbst H, Boecker W, Buerger H.

Department of Pathology, Klinikum Osnabrueck, 49076 Osnabrueck, Germany.

Several "high throughput methods" have been introduced into research and routine
laboratories during the past decade. Providing a new approach to the analysis of
genomic alterations and RNA or protein expression patterns, these new techniques
generate a plethora of new data in a relatively short time, and promise to
deliver clues to the diagnosis and treatment of human cancer. Along with these
revolutionary developments, new tools for the interpretation of these large sets
of data became necessary and are now widely available. Tissue microarray (TMA)
technology is one of these new tools. It is based on the idea of applying
miniaturisation and a high throughput approach to the analysis of intact
tissues. The potential and the scientific value of TMAs in modern research have
been demonstrated in a logarithmically increasing number of studies. The
spectrum for additional applications is widening rapidly, and comprises quality
control in histotechnology, longterm tissue banking, and the continuing
education of pathologists. This review covers the basic technical aspects of TMA
production and discusses the current and potential future applications of TMA
technology.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12890740 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR26: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 22;19(11):1348-59. 

Noise sampling method: an ANOVA approach allowing robust selection of
differentially regulated genes measured by DNA microarrays.

Draghici S, Kulaeva O, Hoff B, Petrov A, Shams S, Tainsky MA.

Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, 431 State Hall, Detroit,
MI, 48202, USA. sod@cs.wayne.edu

MOTIVATION: A crucial step in microarray data analysis is the selection of
subsets of interesting genes from the initial set of genes. In many cases,
especially when comparing a specific condition to a reference, the genes of
interest are those which are differentially expressed. Two common methods for
gene selection are: (a) selection by fold difference (at least n fold variation)
and (b) selection by altered ratio (at least n standard deviations away from the
mean ratio). RESULTS: The novel method proposed here is based on ANOVA and uses
replicate spots to estimate an empirical distribution of the noise. The measured
intensity range is divided in a number of intervals. A noise distribution is
constructed for each such interval. Bootstrapping is used to map the desired
confidence levels from the noise distribution corresponding to a given interval
to the measured log ratios in that interval. If the method is applied on
individual arrays having replicate spots, the method can calculate an overall
width of the noise distribution which can be used as an indicator of the array
quality. We compared this method with the fold change and unusual ratio method.
We also discuss the relationship with an ANOVA model proposed by Churchill et
al. In silico experiments were performed while controlling the degree of
regulation as well as the amount of noise. Such experiments show the performance
of the classical methods can be very unsatisfactory. We also compared the
results of the 2-fold method with the results of the noise sampling method using
pre and post immortalization cell lines derived from the MDAH041 fibroblasts
hybridized on Affymetrix GeneChip arrays. The 2-fold method reported 198 genes
as upregulated and 493 genes as downregulated. The noise sampling method
reported 98 gene upregulated and 240 genes downregulated at the 99.99%
confidence level. The methods agreed on 221 genes downregulated and 66 genes
upregulated. Fourteen genes from the subset of genes reported by both methods
were all confirmed by Q-RT-PCR. Alternative assays on various subsets of genes
on which the two methods disagreed suggested that the noise sampling method is
likely to provide fewer false positives.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12874046 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR27: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 22;19(11):1341-7. 

Quantitative quality control in microarray experiments and the application in
data filtering, normalization and false positive rate prediction.

Wang X, Hessner MJ, Wu Y, Pati N, Ghosh S.

Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College and Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. xujing@mcw.edu

Data preprocessing including proper normalization and adequate quality control
before complex data mining is crucial for studies using the cDNA microarray
technology. We have developed a simple procedure that integrates data filtering
and normalization with quantitative quality control of microarray experiments.
Previously we have shown that data variability in a microarray experiment can be
very well captured by a quality score q(com) that is defined for every spot, and
the ratio distribution depends on q(com). Utilizing this knowledge, our
data-filtering scheme allows the investigator to decide on the filtering
stringency according to desired data variability, and our normalization
procedure corrects the q(com)-dependent dye biases in terms of both the location
and the spread of the ratio distribution. In addition, we propose a statistical
model for false positive rate determination based on the design and the quality
of a microarray experiment. The model predicts that a lower limit of 0.5 for the
replicate concordance rate is needed in order to be certain of true positives.
Our work demonstrates the importance and advantages of having a quantitative
quality control scheme for microarrays.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12874045 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR28: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 22;19(11):1325-32. 

New normalization methods for cDNA microarray data.

Wilson DL, Buckley MJ, Helliwell CA, Wilson IW.

CSIRO Mathematical and Information Sciences, Locked Bag 17 North Ryde 1670 NSW,
Australia. dwilson@gmp.usyd.edu.au

MOTIVATION: The focus of this paper is on two new normalization methods for cDNA
microarrays. After the image analysis has been performed on a microarray and
before differentially expressed genes can be detected, some form of
normalization must be applied to the microarrays. Normalization removes biases
towards one or other of the fluorescent dyes used to label each mRNA sample
allowing for proper evaluation of differential gene expression. RESULTS: The two
normalization methods that we present here build on previously described
non-linear normalization techniques. We extend these techniques by firstly
introducing a normalization method that deals with smooth spatial trends in
intensity across microarrays, an important issue that must be dealt with.
Secondly we deal with normalization of a new type of cDNA microarray experiment
that is coming into prevalence, the small scale specialty or 'boutique' array,
where large proportions of the genes on the microarrays are expected to be
highly differentially expressed. AVAILABILITY: The normalization methods
described in this paper are available via http://www.pi.csiro.au/gena/ in a
software suite called tRMA: tools for R Microarray Analysis upon request of the
authors. Images and data used in this paper are also available via the same
link.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12874043 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR29: Biotechniques. 2003 Jul;35(1):164-8. 

Automated evaluation and normalization of immunohistochemistry on tissue
microarrays with a DNA microarray scanner.

Haedicke W, Popper HH, Buck CR, Zatloukal K.

Oridis Biomed, Graz, Austria.

Hundreds of tissue samples may be assembled in a tissue microarray format for
simultaneous immunostaining assessment of protein expression profiling. A DNA
microarray two-color laser scanner was used for automated analysis of tissue
microarray indirect immunofluorescence. On sections from both a human lung
adenocarcinoma and a squamous cell carcinoma tissue microarray, fluorescence
intensity for two epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR and c-erbB2)
correlates with diagnostic pathologic assessment, indicating that
immunohistochemistry quantitation can be achieved. Importantly, double-label
indirect immunofluorescence detection with the cDNA scanner demonstrates that
one reference antigen can normalize tumor marker immunosignal for the cellular
content of tissue microarray tissue cores. Therefore, DNA microarray scanners
and associated image analysis software provide general and efficient analysis of
tissue microarray immunostaining, including estimation of specific protein
expression levels.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12866417 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR30: Biotechniques. 2003 Jul;35(1):42-4, 46, 48. 

Identification and correction of spurious spatial correlations in microarray
data.

Qian J, Kluger Y, Yu H, Gerstein M.

Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 12866403 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR31: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 1;19(10):1236-42. 

Estimating the occurrence of false positives and false negatives in microarray
studies by approximating and partitioning the empirical distribution of
p-values.

Pounds S, Morris SW.

Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N.
Lauderdale St., Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA. stanley.pounds@stjude.org

MOTIVATION: The occurrence of false positives and false negatives in a
microarray analysis could be easily estimated if the distribution of p-values
were approximated and then expressed as a mixture of null and alternative
densities. Essentially any distribution of p-values can be expressed as such a
mixture by extracting a uniform density from it. RESULTS: The occurrence of
false positives and false negatives in a microarray analysis could be easily
estimated if the distribution of p-values were approximated and then expressed
as a mixture of null and alternative densities. Essentially any distribution of
p-values can be expressed as such a mixture by extracting a uniform density from
it. AVAILABILITY: An S-plus function library is available from
http://www.stjuderesearch.org/statistics.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12835267 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR32: Methods Mol Biol. 2003;234:73-91. 

Real-time polymerase chain reaction quantitation of relative expression of genes
modulated by p53 using SYBR Green I.

Stagliano KE, Carchman E, Deb S.

Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA.

Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) using the Roche
LightCycler was used to verify the expression of asparagine synthetase (ASNS)
identified by microarray analysis as a target of p53 transrepression and mutant
p53 transactivation. A p53-null cell line derived from lung carcinoma, H1299,
was infected with recombinant adenovirus expressing wild-type (WT) p53, mutant
p53-D281G, or beta-galactosidase as a control. After 24 h of infection, RNA was
harvested and used for microarray analysis. ASNS was one of several genes whose
expression was down-regulated by WT p53 and up-regulated in the presence of
mutant p53. Expression levels of ASNS were measured relative to an exogenously
applied quality-control nucleic acid template. Real-time PCR product
accumulation was monitored using the intercalating dye, SYBR Green I, which
exhibits a higher fluorescence upon binding of double-stranded DNA. Relative
gene expression was calculated using conditions at the early stages of PCR, when
amplification was logarithmic and, thus, could be correlated to initial copy
number of gene transcripts. ASNS was found to be down-regulated in the presence
of WT p53 and up-regulated by mutant p53.

PMID: 12824526 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR33: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jul 1;31(13):3477-82. 

ExpressYourself: A modular platform for processing and visualizing microarray
data.

Luscombe NM, Royce TE, Bertone P, Echols N, Horak CE, Chang JT, Snyder M,
Gerstein M.

Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 266
Whitney Avenue, PO Box 208114, New Haven CT 06520-8114, USA.
nicholas.luscombe@yale.edu

DNA microarrays are widely used in biological research; by analyzing
differential hybridization on a single microarray slide, one can detect changes
in mRNA expression levels, increases in DNA copy numbers and the location of
transcription factor binding sites on a genomic scale. Having performed the
experiments, the major challenge is to process large, noisy datasets in order to
identify the specific array elements that are significantly differentially
hybridized. This normally requires aggregating different, often incompatible
programs into a multi-step pipeline. Here we present ExpressYourself, a fully
integrated platform for processing microarray data. In completely automated
fashion, it will correct the background array signal, normalize the Cy5 and Cy3
signals, score levels of differential hybridization, combine the results of
replicate experiments, filter problematic regions of the array and assess the
quality of individual and replicate experiments. ExpressYourself is designed
with a highly modular architecture so various types of microarray analysis
algorithms can readily be incorporated as they are developed; for example, the
system currently implements several normalization methods, including those that
simultaneously consider signal intensity and slide location. The processed data
are presented using a web-based graphical interface to facilitate comparison
with the original images of the array slides. In particular, Express Yourself is
able to regenerate images of the original microarray after applying various
steps of processing, which greatly facilities identification of
position-specific artifacts. The program is freely available for use at
http://bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu/expressyourself.

PMID: 12824348 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR34: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jun 12;19(9):1090-9. 

Bagging to improve the accuracy of a clustering procedure.

Dudoit S, Fridlyand J.

Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of California,
Berkeley, 140 Earl Warren Hall, 7360, Berkeley, CA 94720-7360, USA.
sandrine@stat.berkeley.edu

MOTIVATION: The microarray technology is increasingly being applied in
biological and medical research to address a wide range of problems such as the
classification of tumors. An important statistical question associated with
tumor classification is the identification of new tumor classes using gene
expression profiles. Essential aspects of this clustering problem include
identifying accurate partitions of the tumor samples into clusters and assessing
the confidence of cluster assignments for individual samples. RESULTS: Two new
resampling methods, inspired from bagging in prediction, are proposed to improve
and assess the accuracy of a given clustering procedure. In these ensemble
methods, a partitioning clustering procedure is applied to bootstrap learning
sets and the resulting multiple partitions are combined by voting or the
creation of a new dissimilarity matrix. As in prediction, the motivation behind
bagging is to reduce variability in the partitioning results via averaging. The
performances of the new and existing methods were compared using simulated data
and gene expression data from two recently published cancer microarray studies.
The bagged clustering procedures were in general at least as accurate and often
substantially more accurate than a single application of the partitioning
clustering procedure. A valuable by-product of bagged clustering are the cluster
votes which can be used to assess the confidence of cluster assignments for
individual observations. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: For supplementary
information on datasets, analyses, and software, consult
http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~sandrine and http://www.bioconductor.org.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12801869 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR35: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jun 12;19(9):1046-54. 

Modified nonparametric approaches to detecting differentially expressed genes in
replicated microarray experiments.

Zhao Y, Pan W.

Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, MMC
303, A460 Mayo Building, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

MOTIVATION: An important goal in analyzing microarray data is to determine which
genes are differentially expressed across two kinds of tissue samples or samples
obtained under two experimental conditions. Various parametric tests, such as
the two-sample t-test, have been used, but their possibly too strong parametric
assumptions or large sample justifications may not hold in practice. As
alternatives, a class of three nonparametric statistical methods, including the
empirical Bayes method of Efron et al. (2001), the significance analysis of
microarray (SAM) method of Tusher et al. (2001) and the mixture model method
(MMM) of Pan et al. (2001), have been proposed. All the three methods depend on
constructing a test statistic and a so-called null statistic such that the null
statistic's distribution can be used to approximate the null distribution of the
test statistic. However, relatively little effort has been directed toward
assessment of the performance or the underlying assumptions of the methods in
constructing such test and null statistics. RESULTS: We point out a problem of a
current method to construct the test and null statistics, which may lead to
largely inflated Type I errors (i.e. false positives). We also propose two
modifications that overcome the problem. In the context of MMM, the improved
performance of the modified methods is demonstrated using simulated data. In
addition, our numerical results also provide evidence to support the utility and
effectiveness of MMM.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12801864 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR36: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jun 1;31(11):e60. 

Use of a three-color cDNA microarray platform to measure and control
support-bound probe for improved data quality and reproducibility.

Hessner MJ, Wang X, Khan S, Meyer L, Schlicht M, Tackes J, Datta MW, Jacob HJ,
Ghosh S.

The Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Department of
Pediatrics, The Medical College of Wisconsin and Children's Hospital of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. mhessner@mcw.edu

Construction methodologies for cDNA microarrays lack the ability to determine
array integrity prior to hybridization, leaving the array itself a source of
uncontrolled experimental variation. We solved this problem through development
of a three-color cDNA array platform whereby printed probes are tagged with
fluorescein and are compatible with Cy3 and Cy5 target labeling dyes when using
confocal laser scanners possessing narrow bandwidths. Here we use this approach
to: (i) develop a tracking system to monitor the printing of probe plates at
predicted coordinates; (ii) define the quantity of immobilized probe necessary
for quality hybridized array data to establish pre-hybridization array selection
criteria; (iii) investigate factors that influence probe availability for
hybridization; and (iv) explore the feasibility of hybridized data filtering
using element fluorescein intensity. A direct and significant relationship (R2 =
0.73, P < 0.001) between pre-hybridization average fluorescein intensity and
subsequent hybridized replicate consistency was observed, illustrating that data
quality can be improved by selecting arrays that meet defined pre-hybridization
criteria. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our three-color approach provides a
means to filter spots possessing insufficient bound probe from hybridized data
sets to further improve data quality. Collectively, this strategy will improve
microarray data and increase its utility as a sensitive screening tool.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 12771224 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR37: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 22;19(8):973-80. 

Fuzzy C-means method for clustering microarray data.

Dembele D, Kastner P.

Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS-IMSERM-ULP,
BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France. doulaye@titus.u-strasbg.fr

MOTIVATION: Clustering analysis of data from DNA microarray hybridization
studies is essential for identifying biologically relevant groups of genes.
Partitional clustering methods such as K-means or self-organizing maps assign
each gene to a single cluster. However, these methods do not provide information
about the influence of a given gene for the overall shape of clusters. Here we
apply a fuzzy partitioning method, Fuzzy C-means (FCM), to attribute cluster
membership values to genes. RESULTS: A major problem in applying the FCM method
for clustering microarray data is the choice of the fuzziness parameter m. We
show that the commonly used value m = 2 is not appropriate for some data sets,
and that optimal values for m vary widely from one data set to another. We
propose an empirical method, based on the distribution of distances between
genes in a given data set, to determine an adequate value for m. By setting
threshold levels for the membership values, genes which are tigthly associated
to a given cluster can be selected. Using a yeast cell cycle data set as an
example, we show that this selection increases the overall biological
significance of the genes within the cluster. AVAILABILITY: Supplementary text
and Matlab functions are available at http://www-igbmc.u-strasbg.fr/fcm/

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12761060 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR38: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 22;19(8):956-65. 

Microarray standard data set and figures of merit for comparing data processing
methods and experiment designs.

He YD, Dai H, Schadt EE, Cavet G, Edwards SW, Stepaniants SB, Duenwald S,
Kleinhanz R, Jones AR, Shoemaker DD, Stoughton RB.

Rosetta Inpharmatics Inc., 12 040 115th Avenue Northeast, Kirkland, WA 98034,
USA. yudong_he@merck.com

MOTIVATION: There is a very large and growing level of effort toward improving
the platforms, experiment designs, and data analysis methods for microarray
expression profiling. Along with a growing richness in the approaches there is a
growing confusion among most scientists as to how to make objective comparisons
and choices between them for different applications. There is a need for a
standard framework for the microarray community to compare and improve
analytical and statistical methods. RESULTS: We report on a microarray data set
comprising 204 in-situ synthesized oligonucleotide arrays, each hybridized with
two-color cDNA samples derived from 20 different human tissues and cell lines.
Design of the approximately 24 000 60mer oligonucleotides that report
approximately 2500 known genes on the arrays, and design of the hybridization
experiments, were carried out in a way that supports the performance assessment
of alternative data processing approaches and of alternative experiment and
array designs. We also propose standard figures of merit for success in
detecting individual differential expression changes or expression levels, and
for detecting similarities and differences in expression patterns across genes
and experiments. We expect this data set and the proposed figures of merit will
provide a standard framework for much of the microarray community to compare and
improve many analytical and statistical methods relevant to microarray data
analysis, including image processing, normalization, error modeling, combining
of multiple reporters per gene, use of replicate experiments, and sample
referencing schemes in measurements based on expression change.
AVAILABILITY/SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Expression data and supplementary
information are available at http://www.rii.com/publications/2003/HE_SDS.htm

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12761058 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR39: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 22;19(8):944-51. 

Corrected small-sample estimation of the Bayes error.

Brun M, Sabbagh DL, Kim S, Dougherty ER.

Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77840, USA.

MOTIVATION: A major problem of pattern classification is estimation of the Bayes
error when only small samples are available. One way to estimate the Bayes error
is to design a classifier based on some classification rule applied to sample
data, estimate the error of the designed classifier, and then use this estimate
as an estimate of the Bayes error. Relative to the Bayes error, the expected
error of the designed classifier is biased high, and this bias can be severe
with small samples. RESULTS: This paper provides a correction for the bias by
subtracting a term derived from the representation of the estimation error. It
does so for Boolean classifiers, these being defined on binary features.
Although the general theory applies to any Boolean classifier, a model is
introduced to reduce the number of parameters. A key point is that the expected
correction is conservative. Properties of the corrected estimate are studied via
simulation. The correction applies to binary predictors because they are
mathematically identical to Boolean classifiers. In this context the correction
is adapted to the coefficient of determination, which has been used to measure
nonlinear multivariate relations between genes and design genetic regulatory
networks. An application using gene-expression data from a microarray experiment
is provided on the website http://gspsnap.tamu.edu/smallsample/
(user:'smallsample', password:'smallsample)').

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12761056 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR40: Heart. 2003 Jun;89(6):597-604. 

Microarray analysis: a novel research tool for cardiovascular scientists and
physicians.

Napoli C, Lerman LO, Sica V, Lerman A, Tajana G, de Nigris F.

Department of Medicine, University of Naples, Italy. claunap@tin.it

The massive increase in information on the human DNA sequence and the
development of new technologies will have a profound impact on the diagnosis and
treatment of cardiovascular diseases. The microarray is a micro-hybridisation
based assay. The filter, called microchip or chip, is a special kind of membrane
in which are spotted several thousands of oligonucleotides of cDNA fragments
coding for known genes or expressed sequence tags. The resulting hybridisation
signal on the chip is analysed by a fluorescent scanner and processed with a
software package utilising the information on the oligonucleotide or cDNA map of
the chip to generate a list of relative gene expression. Microarray technology
can be used for many different purposes, most prominently to measure
differential gene expression, variations in gene sequence (by analysing the
genome of mutant phenotypes), or more recently, the entire binding site for
transcription factors. Measurements of gene expression have the advantage of
providing all available sequence information for any given experimental design
and data interpretation in pursuit of biological understanding. This research
tool will contribute to radically changing our understanding of cardiovascular
diseases.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12748210 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR41: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 1;19(7):825-33. 

Non-linear normalization and background correction in one-channel cDNA
microarray studies.

Edwards D.

Department of Biostatistics, Novo Nordisk, Bagsvaerd, Denmark.
DEd@novonordisk.com

MOTIVATION: Data from one-channel cDNA microarray studies may exhibit poor
reproducibility due to spatial heterogeneity, non-linear array-to-array
variation and problems in correcting for background. Uncorrected, these
phenomena can give rise to misleading conclusions. RESULTS: Spatial
heterogeneity may be corrected using two-dimensional loess smoothing (Colantuoni
et al., 2002). Non-linear between-array variation may be corrected using an
iterative application of one-dimensional loess smoothing. A method for
background correction using a smoothing function rather than simple subtraction
is described. These techniques promote within-array spatial uniformity and
between-array reproducibility. Their application is illustrated using data from
a study of the effects of an insulin sensitizer, rosiglitazone, on gene
expression in white adipose tissue in diabetic db/db mice. They may also be
useful with data from two-channel cDNA microarrays and from oligonucleotide
arrays. AVAILABILITY: R functions for the methods described are available on
request from the author.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12724292 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR42: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 1;19(7):818-24. 

Robust cluster analysis of microarray gene expression data with the number of
clusters determined biologically.

Bickel DR.

Medical College of Georgia, Office of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, 1120
Fifteenth St, AE-3037 Augusta 30912-4900, USA. dbickel@mail.mcg.edu

MOTIVATION: The success of each method of cluster analysis depends on how well
its underlying model describes the patterns of expression. Outlier-resistant and
distribution-insensitive clustering of genes are robust against violations of
model assumptions. RESULTS: A measure of dissimilarity that combines advantages
of the Euclidean distance and the correlation coefficient is introduced. The
measure can be made robust using a rank order correlation coefficient. A robust
graphical method of summarizing the results of cluster analysis and a biological
method of determining the number of clusters are also presented. These methods
are applied to a public data set, showing that rank-based methods perform better
than log-based methods. AVAILABILITY: Software is available from
http://www.davidbickel.com.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12724291 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR43: Bioinformatics. 2003 May 1;19(7):803-10. 

Statistical design of reverse dye microarrays.

Dobbin K, Shih JH, Simon R.

National Cancer Institute, Biometric Research Branch, 6130 Executive Blvd., MSC
7434, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. dobbinke@mail.nih.gov

MOTIVATION: In cDNA microarray experiments all samples are labelled with either
Cy3 dye or Cy5 dye. Certain genes exhibit dye bias-a tendency to bind more
efficiently to one of the dyes. The common reference design avoids the problem
of dye bias by running all arrays 'forward', so that the samples being compared
are always labelled with the same dye. But comparison of samples labelled with
different dyes is sometimes of interest. In these situations, it is necessary to
run some arrays 'reverse'-with the dye labelling reversed-in order to correct
for the dye bias. The design of these experiments will impact one's ability to
identify genes that are differentially expressed in different tissues or
conditions. We address the design issue of how many specimens are needed, how
many forward and reverse labelled arrays to perform, and how to optimally assign
Cy3 and Cy5 labels to the specimens. RESULTS: We consider three types of
experiments for which some reverse labelling is needed: paired samples, samples
from two predefined groups, and reference design data when comparison with the
reference is of interest. We present simple probability models for the data,
derive optimal estimators for relative gene expression, and compare the
efficiency of the estimators for a range of designs. In each case, we present
the optimal design and sample size formulas. We show that reverse labelling of
individual arrays is generally not required.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12724289 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR44: Methods Mol Biol. 2003;224:235-48. 

Microarray databases: storage and retrieval of microarray data.

Sherlock G, Ball CA.

Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA,
USA.

PMID: 12710676 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR45: Methods Mol Biol. 2003;224:111-36. 

Statistical issues in cDNA microarray data analysis.

Smyth GK, Yang YH, Speed T.

Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.

PMID: 12710670 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR46: Biotechniques. 2003 Mar;Suppl:62-3. 

QA/QC as a pressing need for microarray analysis: meeting report from CAMDA'02.

Johnson K, Lin S.

Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Publication Types:
    Congresses

PMID: 12664687 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR47: Biotechniques. 2003 Mar;Suppl:55-61. 

Assessing the functional bias of commercial microarrays using the onto-compare
database.

Draghici S, Khatri P, Shah A, Tainsky MA.

Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Microarrays are at the center of a revolution in biotechnology, allowing
researchers to screen tens of thousands of genes simultaneously. Typically, they
have been used in exploratory research to help formulate hypotheses. In most
cases, this phase is followed by a more focused, hypothesis-driven stage in
which certain specific biological processes and pathways are thought to be
involved. Since a single biological process can still involve hundreds of genes,
microarrays are still the preferred approach as proven by the availability of
focused arrays from several manufacturers. Because focused arrays from different
manufacturers use different sets of genes, each array will represent any given
regulatory pathway to a different extent. We argue that a functional analysis of
the arrays available should be the most important criterion used in the array
selection. We developed Onto-Compare as a database that can provide this
functionality, based on the Gene Ontology Consortium nomenclature. We used this
tool to compare several arrays focused on apoptosis, oncogenes, and tumor
suppressors. We considered arrays from BD Biosciences Clontech, PerkinElmer,
Sigma-Genosys, and SuperArray. We showed that among the oncogene arrays, the
PerkinElmer MICROMAX oncogene microarray has a better representation of
oncogenesis, protein phosphorylation, and negative control of cell
proliferation. The comparison of the apoptosis arrays showed that most
apoptosis-related biological processes are equally well represented on the
arrays considered. However, functional categories such as immune response,
cell-cell signaling, cell-surface receptor linked signal transduction, and
interleukins are better represented on the Sigma-Genoys Panorama human apoptosis
array. At the same time, processes such as cell cycle control, oncogenesis, and
negative control of cell proliferation are better represented on the BD
Biosciences Clontech Atlas Select human apoptosis array.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12664686 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR48: Biotechniques. 2003 Mar;Suppl:16-21. 

Experimental design of DNA microarray experiments.

Simon RM, Dobbin K.

Biometric Research Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

PMID: 12664680 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR49: Rinsho Byori. 2002 Nov;Suppl 123:19-29. 

[Recent advances in molecular diagnostic tests]

[Article in Japanese]

Miyachi H.

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine.

Recent advances in molecular biotechnologies have facilitated laboratory use of
molecular diagnostic tests. Automated systems for amplification and detection,
and lately for extraction, of nucleic acid sequences have been developed. The
automated systems have allowed improvement of not only assay efficiency but also
quality control of the tests. The information on the genome sequence from the
human genome project has been studied to elucidate functions of genes and
proteins and the clinical significance of nucleic acid sequences with
post-genomics such as expression profiling using DNA microarray, proteomics, and
single nucleotide polymorphism analysis, in conjunction with bioinformatics. Now
the challenge is the development and application of these new technologies as
clinical diagnostic tools. Design of a diagnostic array or panel must be
developed with defined sequences based on interpretation of a huge quantity of
experimental data to meet clinical demands. There is a need for development of
generally available instruments that are inexpensive, practical and more
importantly reproducible and reliable.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12652786 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR50: Nature. 2003 Mar 13;422(6928):233-7. 

Biomedical informatics for proteomics.

Boguski MS, McIntosh MW.

Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview
Avenue North, PO Box 19024, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. mboguski@fhcrc.org

Success in proteomics depends upon careful study design and high-quality
biological samples. Advanced information technologies, and also an ability to
use existing knowledge to the full, will be crucial in making sense of the data.
Despite its genome-scale potential, proteome analysis is at a much earlier stage
of development than genomics and gene expression (microarray) studies.
Fundamental issues involving biological variability, pre-analytic factors and
analytical reproducibility remain to be resolved. Consequently, the analysis of
proteomics data is currently informal and relies heavily on expert opinion.
Databases and software tools developed for the analysis of molecular sequences
and microarrays are helpful, but are limited owing to the unique attributes of
proteomics data and differing research goals.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12634797 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR51: Biotechniques. 2003 Feb;34(2):402-7. 

Automated high-throughput probe production for DNA microarray analysis.

Hoyt PR, Tack L, Jones BH, Van Dinther J, Staat S, Doktycz MJ.

Life Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2008, MS 6123,
Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA. hoytpr@ornl.gov

DNA microarrays have become an established tool for gene expression profiling.
Construction of these microarrays using immobilized cDNAs is a common
experimental strategy. However, this is extremely laborious, requiring the
preparation of hundreds or thousands of cDNA probes. To minimize this initial
bottleneck, we developed a comprehensive high-throughput robotic system to
prepare DNA probes suitable for microarray analysis with minimal user
intervention. We describe an automated system using the MultiPROBE Nucleic Acid
Purification Workstation to provide the liquid handling and other functions
needed to optimize this process. We were able to carry out fully automated
plasmid cDNA isolation, PCR assay setup, and PCR purification and also to direct
the characterization and tracking of DNA probes during processing. Protocols
began with the initial preparation of a plasmid DNA archive of bacterial stocks
in parallel 96-well plates (192 samples/run) and continued through to the
dilution and reformatting of chip-ready DNA probes in 384-well format. These and
other probe production procedures and additional instrument systems were used to
process fully a set of mouse cDNA clones that were then validated by
differential gene expression analysis.

Publication Types:
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12613263 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR52: Biotechniques. 2003 Feb;34(2):394-400. 

RNA amplification strategies for cDNA microarray experiments.

Wang J, Hu L, Hamilton SR, Coombes KR, Zhang W.

University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

The biological materials available for cDNA microarray studies are often
limiting. Thus, protocols have been developed to amplify RNAs isolated from
limited amounts of tissues or cells. RNA amplification by in vitro transcription
is the most widely used among the available amplification protocols. Two means
of generating a dsDNA template for the RNA polymerase are a combination of
reverse transcription with conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis and a
combination of the switch mechanism at the 5' end of RNA templates (SMART) with
reverse transcription, followed by PCR. To date, there has been no systematic
comparison of the efficiency of the two amplification strategies. In this study,
we performed and analyzed a set of six microarray experiments involving the use
of a "regular" (unamplified) microarray experimental protocol and two different
RNA amplification protocols. Based on their ability to identify differentially
expressed genes and assuming that the results from the regular protocol are
correct, our analyses demonstrated that both amplification protocols achieved
reproducible and reliable results. From the same amount of starting material,
our results also indicated that more amplified RNA can be obtained using
conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis than from the combination of SMART and
PCR. When the critical issue is the amount of starting RNA, we recommend the
conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis as the preferred amplification method.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12613262 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR53: Biotechniques. 2003 Feb;34(2):386-8, 390, 392-3. 

Probe generation directly from small numbers of cells for DNA microarray
studies.

Xiang CC, Chen M, Kozhich OA, Phan QN, Inman JM, Chen Y, Brownstein MJ.

NIMH/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Recently, we described a technique that allows us to prepare probes for
expression profiling from 0.5-1 microgram RNA without template or signal
amplification. However, we were unable to use this method to study cells
harvested by needle biopsy, cell sorting, or laser capture microdissection. Here
we give a new protocol for amplifying RNA with multiple reaction cycles and
preparing fluorescent probes from approximately 10 cells. We use random 9-mers
with a T3 RNA polymerase recognition sequence on the 5' end for every round of
cDNA synthesis except the first. The latter is primed with oligo(dT) with a T7
RNA polymerase recognition sequence on the 5' end. Results were highly
reproducible and reliable, and the products generated using our method seemed
comparable to those produced using the RiboAmp RNA kit when both were used to do
two cycles of amplification. To test our method's utility, we lysed cells
directly into reverse transcription buffer containing RNase inhibitor and
performed three rounds of RNA amplification. The expression profiles of mouse C2
and NIH 3T3 cells obtained with 11,232-element arrays using amplified RNAs were
similar to those seen when probes were prepared from unamplified templates.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Technical Report
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12613261 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR54: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jan 22;19(2):283-4. 

QuickLIMS: facilitating the data management for DNA-microarray fabrication.

Kokocinski F, Wrobel G, Hahn M, Lichter P.

Department of Molecular Genetics, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum INF 280,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. f.kokocinski@dkfz.de

SUMMARY: QuickLIMS is a Microsoft Access-based laboratory information and
management system, capable of processing all information for microarray
production. The program's operational flow is protocol-based, dynamically
adapting to changes of the process. It interacts with the laboratory robot and
with other database systems over the network, and it represents a complete
solution for the management of the entire manufacturing process. AVAILABILITY
AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
http://www.dkfz-heidelberg.de/kompl_genome/Other/QuickLims/index.html

PMID: 12538251 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR55: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jan 22;19(2):194-203. 

Combinatorial image analysis of DNA microarray features.

Glasbey CA, Ghazal P.

Biomathematics and Statistics Scotland, JCMB, King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9
3JZ, Scotland, UK. chris@bioss.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: DNA and protein microarrays have become an established leading-edge
technology for large-scale analysis of gene and protein content and activity.
Contact-printed microarrays has emerged as a relatively simple and cost
effective method of choice but its reliability is especially susceptible to
quality of pixel information obtained from digital scans of spotted features in
the microarray image. RESULTS: We address the statistical computation
requirements for optimizing data acquisition and processing of digital scans. We
consider the use of median filters to reduce noise levels in images and top-hat
filters to correct for trends in background values. We also consider, as
alternative estimators of spot intensity, discs of fixed radius, proportions of
histograms and k-means clustering, either with or without a square-root
intensity transformation and background subtraction. We identify, using
combinatoric procedures, optimal filter and estimator parameters, in achieving
consistency among the replicates of a gene on each microarray. Our results,
using test data from microarrays of HCMV, indicate that a highly effective
approach for improving reliability and quality of microarray data is to apply a
21 by 21 top-hat filter, then estimate spot intensity as the mean of the largest
20% of pixel values in the target region, after a square-root transformation,
and corrected for background, by subtracting the mean of the smallest 70% of
pixel values. AVAILABILITY: Fortran90 subroutines implementing these methods are
available from the authors, or at http://www.bioss.ac.uk/~chris.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12538239 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR56: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jan 1;31(1):97-100. 

TRANSPATH: an integrated database on signal transduction and a tool for array
analysis.

Krull M, Voss N, Choi C, Pistor S, Potapov A, Wingender E.

BIOBASE Biological Databases GmbH, Halchtersche Strasse 33, D-38304
Wolfenbuttel, Germany. mkl@biobase.de

TRANSPATH is a database system about gene regulatory networks that combines
encyclopedic information on signal transduction with tools for visualization and
analysis. The integration with TRANSFAC, a database about transcription factors
and their DNA binding sites, provides the possibility to obtain complete
signaling pathways from ligand to target genes and their products, which may
themselves be involved in regulatory action. As of July 2002, the TRANSPATH
Professional release 3.2 contains about 9800 molecules, >1800 genes and >11 400
reactions collected from approximately 5000 references. With the ArrayAnalyzer,
an integrated tool has been developed for evaluation of microarray data. It uses
the TRANSPATH data set to identify key regulators in pathways connected with up-
or down-regulated genes of the respective array. The key molecules and their
surrounding networks can be viewed with the PathwayBuilder, a tool that offers
four different modes of visualization. More information on TRANSPATH is
available at http://www.biobase.de/pages/products/databases.html.

PMID: 12519957 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR57: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jan 1;31(1):94-6. 

The Stanford Microarray Database: data access and quality assessment tools.

Gollub J, Ball CA, Binkley G, Demeter J, Finkelstein DB, Hebert JM,
Hernandez-Boussard T, Jin H, Kaloper M, Matese JC, Schroeder M, Brown PO,
Botstein D, Sherlock G.

Department of Genetics, Center for Clinical Sciences Research, 269 Campus Drive,
Room 2255b, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5163, USA.

The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD;
http://genome-www.stanford.edu/microarray/) serves as a microarray research
database for Stanford investigators and their collaborators. In addition, SMD
functions as a resource for the entire scientific community, by making freely
available all of its source code and providing full public access to data
published by SMD users, along with many tools to explore and analyze those data.
SMD currently provides public access to data from 3500 microarrays, including
data from 85 publications, and this total is increasing rapidly. In this
article, we describe some of SMD's newer tools for accessing public data,
assessing data quality and for data analysis.

PMID: 12519956 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR58: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jan;19(1):53-61. 

Analysis of whole-genome microarray replicates using mixed models.

Wernisch L, Kendall SL, Soneji S, Wietzorrek A, Parish T, Hinds J, Butcher PD,
Stoker NG.

School of Crystallography, Birkbeck College, London WC1E 7HX, UK.
l.wernisch@bbk.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Microarray experiments are inherently noisy. Replication is the key
to estimating realistic fold-changes despite such noise. In the analysis of the
various sources of noise the dependency structure of the replication needs to be
taken into account. RESULTS: We analyzed replicate data sets from a
Mycobacterium tuberculosis trcS mutant in order to identify differentially
expressed genes and suggest new methods for filtering and normalizing raw array
data and for imputing missing values. Mixed ANOVA models are applied to quantify
the various sources of error. Such analysis also allows us to determine the
optimal number of samples and arrays. Significance values for differential
expression are obtained by a hierarchical bootstrapping scheme on scaled
residuals. Four highly upregulated genes, including bfrB, were analyzed further.
We observed an artefact, where transcriptional readthrough from these genes led
to apparent upregulation of adjacent genes. AVAILABILITY: All methods and data
discussed are available in the package
YASMAhttp://www.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/wernisch/yasma.html for the statistical data
analysis system R (http://www.R-project.org).

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12499293 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR59: Bioinformatics. 2003 Jan;19(1):45-52. 

Evolutionary algorithms for finding optimal gene sets in microarray prediction.

Deutsch JM.

University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. josh@physics.ucsc.edu

MOTIVATION: Microarray data has been shown recently to be efficacious in
distinguishing closely related cell types that often appear in different forms
of cancer, but is not yet practical clinically. However, the data might be used
to construct a minimal set of marker genes that could then be used clinically by
making antibody assays to diagnose a specific type of cancer. Here a replication
algorithm is used for this purpose. It evolves an ensemble of predictors, all
using different combinations of genes to generate a set of optimal predictors.
RESULTS: We apply this method to the leukemia data of the Whitehead/MIT group
that attempts to differentially diagnose two kinds of leukemia, and also to data
of Khan et al. to distinguish four different kinds of childhood cancers. In the
latter case we were able to reduce the number of genes needed from 96 to less
than 15, while at the same time being able to classify all of their test data
perfectly. We also apply this method to two other cases, Diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma data (Shipp et al., 2002), and data of Ramaswamy et al. on multiclass
diagnosis of 14 common tumor types. AVAILABILITY:
http://stravinsky.ucsc.edu/josh/gesses/.

PMID: 12499292 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR60: Bioinformatics. 2002 Dec;18(12):1609-16. 

Calculation of the minimum number of replicate spots required for detection of
significant gene expression fold change in microarray experiments.

Black MA, Doerge RW.

Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA.blackma@stat.purdue.edu

MOTIVATION: We present statistical methods for determining the number of per
gene replicate spots required in microarray experiments. The purpose of these
methods is to obtain an estimate of the sampling variability present in
microarray data, and to determine the number of replicate spots required to
achieve a high probability of detecting a significant fold change in gene
expression, while maintaining a low error rate. Our approach is based on data
from control microarrays, and involves the use of standard statistical
estimation techniques. RESULTS: After analyzing two experimental data sets
containing control array data, we were able to determine the statistical power
available for the detection of significant differential expression given
differing levels of replication. The inclusion of replicate spots on microarrays
not only allows more accurate estimation of the variability present in an
experiment, but more importantly increases the probability of detecting genes
undergoing significant fold changes in expression, while substantially
decreasing the probability of observing fold changes due to chance rather than
true differential expression.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12490445 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR61: Bioinformatics. 2002 Dec;18(12):1600-8. 

Between-group analysis of microarray data.

Culhane AC, Perriere G, Considine EC, Cotter TG, Higgins DG.

Department of Biochemistry, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
A.Culhane@ucc.ie

MOTIVATION: Most supervised classification methods are limited by the
requirement for more cases than variables. In microarray data the number of
variables (genes) far exceeds the number of cases (arrays), and thus filtering
and pre-selection of genes is required. We describe the application of Between
Group Analysis (BGA) to the analysis of microarray data. A feature of BGA is
that it can be used when the number of variables (genes) exceeds the number of
cases (arrays). BGA is based on carrying out an ordination of groups of samples,
using a standard method such as Correspondence Analysis (COA), rather than an
ordination of the individual microarray samples. As such, it can be viewed as a
method of carrying out COA with grouped data. RESULTS: We illustrate the power
of the method using two cancer data sets. In both cases, we can quickly and
accurately classify test samples from any number of specified a priori groups
and identify the genes which characterize these groups. We obtained very high
rates of correct classification, as determined by jack-knife or validation
experiments with training and test sets. The results are comparable to those
from other methods in terms of accuracy but the power and flexibility of BGA
make it an especially attractive method for the analysis of microarray cancer
data.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12490444 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR62: Mod Pathol. 2002 Dec;15(12):1374-80. 

Tissue microarrays are an effective quality assurance tool for diagnostic
immunohistochemistry.

Hsu FD, Nielsen TO, Alkushi A, Dupuis B, Huntsman D, Liu CL, van de Rijn M,
Gilks CB.

Department of Pathology and Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, Vancouver
General Hospital and the University of British Columbia, Canada.

There has been considerable variability in the reported results of
immunohistochemical staining for some diagnostically relevant antigens. Our
objectives in this study were to (1) use a multitumor tissue microarray with
tissue from 351 cases received in our department, representing 16 normal tissues
and 47 different tumor types, to compare immunohistochemical staining results in
our laboratory with published data, using a panel of 22 antibodies; (2) assess
interlaboratory variability of immunohistochemical staining for S-100 using this
microarray; and (3) test the ability of hierarchical clustering analysis to
group tumors by primary site, based on their immunostaining profile. Tissue
microarrays consisting of duplicate 0.6-mm cores from blocks identified in the
hospital archives were constructed and stained according to our usual protocols.
Antibodies directed against the following antigens were used: B72.3, bcl-2,
carcinoembryonic antigen, c-kit, pankeratin, CD 68, CD 99, CK 5/6, CK 7, CK
8/18, CK19, CK 20, CK 22, epithelial membrane antigen, estrogen receptor,
melan-A, p53, placental alkaline phosphatase, S-100, synaptophysin, thyroid
transcription factor-1, and vimentin. Staining results on the array cases were
compared with published results, and hierarchical clustering analysis was
performed based on the immunohistochemical staining results. Unstained slides of
the multitumor tissue microarray were sent to five other diagnostic
immunohistochemistry laboratories and stained for S-100 protein. The staining
results from the different laboratories were compared. Staining results using
our current methods and samples from our laboratory were compatible with those
described in the literature for most antigens. Placental alkaline phosphatase
staining was not specific with our protocol, showing staining of a broad
spectrum of different tumors; this finding initiated a review of our recent
requests for placental alkaline phosphatase immunostaining and revealed two
instances in which placental alkaline phosphatase positivity was incorrectly
interpreted as evidence of a germ cell tumor. S-100 staining was less sensitive
but more specific for the diagnosis of melanoma or neural tumor in our
laboratory, compared to some published reports. Assessment of interlaboratory
variability of S-100 immunostaining showed that there was more frequent staining
of carcinomas in some laboratories, resulting in decreased specificity of S-100
staining in distinguishing melanoma from carcinoma. Hierarchical clustering
analysis showed a strong trend for tumors to cluster by tissue of origin, but
there were significant exceptions. We conclude that multiple-tumor microarrays
are an efficient method for assessing the sensitivity and specificity of
staining with any antibody used diagnostically. As a tool for quality assurance,
they offer the advantage of taking into account local differences in tissue
fixation, processing, and staining. They also allow cost-effective assessment of
interlaboratory variability in immunohistochemical staining. Results of
hierarchical clustering analysis show the potential for panels of
immunohistochemical stains to identify the primary site of metastatic carcinomas
but also confirm the limitations of currently available antibodies in giving
unequivocal tissue-specific staining patterns.

PMID: 12481020 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR63: Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32 Suppl:509-14. 

Post-analysis follow-up and validation of microarray experiments.

Chuaqui RF, Bonner RF, Best CJ, Gillespie JW, Flaig MJ, Hewitt SM, Phillips JL,
Krizman DB, Tangrea MA, Ahram M, Linehan WM, Knezevic V, Emmert-Buck MR.

Pathogenetics Unit, Laboratory of Pathology and Urologic Oncology Branch, Center
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Measurement of gene-expression profiles using microarray technology is becoming
increasingly popular among the biomedical research community. Although there has
been great progress in this field, investigators are still confronted with a
difficult question after completing their experiments: how to validate the large
data sets that are generated? This review summarizes current approaches to
verifying global expression results, discusses the caveats that must be
considered, and describes some methods that are being developed to address
outstanding problems.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12454646 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR64: Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32 Suppl:481-9. 

Options available--from start to finish--for obtaining data from DNA microarrays
II.

Holloway AJ, van Laar RK, Tothill RW, Bowtell DD.

The Ian Potter Foundation Centre for Cancer Genomics and Predictive Medicine and
The Trescowthick Research Laboratories, Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Locked
Bag 1, A'Beckett Street, Melbourne 8006, Victoria, Australia.

Microarray technology has undergone a rapid evolution. With widespread interest
in large-scale genomic research, an abundance of equipment and reagents have now
become available and affordable to a large cross section of the scientific
community. As protocols become more refined, careful investigators are able to
obtain good quality microarray data quickly. In most recent times, however,
perhaps one of the biggest obstacles researchers face is not the manufacture and
use of microarrays at the bench, but storage and analysis of the array data.
This review discusses the most recent equipment, reagents and protocols
available to the researcher, as well as describing data analysis and storage
options available from the evolving field of microarray informatics.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12454642 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR65: Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32 Suppl:474-9. 

Medical applications of microarray technologies: a regulatory science
perspective.

Petricoin EF 3rd, Hackett JL, Lesko LJ, Puri RK, Gutman SI, Chumakov K, Woodcock
J, Feigal DW Jr, Zoon KC, Sistare FD.

Division of Therapeutic Products, Office of Therapeutics Research and Review,
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA. petricoin@cber.fda.gov

The potential medical applications of microarrays have generated much
excitement, and some skepticism, within the biomedical community. Some
researchers have suggested that within the decade microarrays will be routinely
used in the selection, assessment, and quality control of the best drugs for
pharmaceutical development, as well as for disease diagnosis and for monitoring
desired and adverse outcomes of therapeutic interventions. Realizing this
potential will be a challenge for the whole scientific community, as
breakthroughs that show great promise at the bench often fail to meet the
requirements of clinicians and regulatory scientists. The development of a
cooperative framework among regulators, product sponsors, and technology experts
will be essential for realizing the revolutionary promise that microarrays hold
for drug development, regulatory science, medical practice and public health.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12454641 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR66: Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32 Suppl:469-73. 

Microarray databases: standards and ontologies.

Stoeckert CJ Jr, Causton HC, Ball CA.

Center for Bioinformatics and Department of Genetics, University of
Pennsylvania, 423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6021, USA.
stoeckert@pcbi.upenn.edu

A single microarray can provide information on the expression of tens of
thousands of genes. The amount of information generated by a microarray-based
experiment is sufficiently large that no single study can be expected to mine
each nugget of scientific information. As a consequence, the scale and
complexity of microarray experiments require that computer software programs do
much of the data processing, storage, visualization, analysis and transfer. The
adoption of common standards and ontologies for the management and sharing of
microarray data is essential and will provide immediate benefit to the research
community.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12454640 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR67: Chem Res Toxicol. 2002 Nov;15(11):1380-6. 

Analytical reproducibility in (1)H NMR-based metabonomic urinalysis.

Keun HC, Ebbels TM, Antti H, Bollard ME, Beckonert O, Schlotterbeck G, Senn H,
Niederhauser U, Holmes E, Lindon JC, Nicholson JK.

Biological Chemistry, Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. h.keun@ic.ac.uk

Metabonomic analysis of biofluids and tissues utilizing high-resolution NMR
spectroscopy and chemometric techniques has proven valuable in characterizing
the biochemical response to toxicity for many xenobiotics. To assess the
analytical reproducibility of metabonomic protocols, sample preparation and NMR
data acquisition were performed at two sites (one using a 500 MHz and the other
using a 600 MHz system) using two identical (split) sets of urine samples from
an 8-day acute study of hydrazine toxicity in the rat. Despite the difference in
spectrometer operating frequency, both datasets were extremely similar when
analyzed using principal components analysis (PCA) and gave near-identical
descriptions of the metabolic responses to hydrazine treatment. The main
consistent difference between the datasets was related to the efficiency of
water resonance suppression in the spectra. In a 4-PC model of both datasets
combined, describing all systematic dose- and time-related variation (88% of the
total variation), differences between the two datasets accounted for only 3% of
the total modeled variance compared to ca. 15% for normal physiological
(pre-dose) variation. Furthermore, <3% of spectra displayed distinct inter-site
differences, and these were clearly identified as outliers in their respective
dose-group PCA models. No samples produced clear outliers in both datasets,
suggesting that the outliers observed did not reflect an unusual sample
composition, but rather sporadic differences in sample preparation leading to,
for example, very dilute samples. Estimations of the relative concentrations of
citrate, hippurate, and taurine were in >95% correlation (r(2)) between sites,
with an analytical error comparable to normal physiological variation in
concentration (4-8%). The excellent analytical reproducibility and robustness of
metabonomic techniques demonstrated here are highly competitive compared to the
best proteomic analyses and are in significant contrast to genomic microarray
platforms, both of which are complementary techniques for predictive and
mechanistic toxicology. These results have implications for the quantitative
interpretation of metabonomic data, and the establishment of quality control
criteria for both regulatory agencies and for integrating data obtained at
different sites.

PMID: 12437328 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR68: Am J Clin Pathol. 2002 Nov;118(5):675-82. 

Comment in:
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2002 Nov;118(5):669-71.

Tissue array technology for testing interlaboratory and interobserver
reproducibility of immunohistochemical estrogen receptor analysis in a large
multicenter trial.

von Wasielewski R, Mengel M, Wiese B, Rudiger T, Muller-Hermelink HK, Kreipe H.

Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Semiquantitative immunohistochemical assessment of estrogen receptor (ER) is
used to predict the likelihood of response to antiestrogen therapy in breast
carcinoma. If semiquantitative immunohistochemical analysis leads to therapeutic
decisions, the importance of standardization and quality control increases. ER
assessment reproducibility was studied among 172 laboratories using tissue
microarray slides with 20 tissue spots negative and 10 tissue spots expressing
ER at low, medium, or high levels. More than 80% of the laboratories
demonstrated ER positivity in the medium- and high-expressing tissue spots, but
only about 43% succeeded with tissue spots with low expression. Poor
interlaboratory agreement was based on insufficient retrieval efficacy as shown
by additional tests using autoclave pretreatment. The immunohistochemical scores
used to quantify therapeutic target molecules remain inconclusive as long as
progress toward standardized immunohistochemical procedures and evaluation is
not achieved. Tissue microarray technology has proved its suitability for
large-scale immunohistochemical trials, giving rise to new dimensions in control
assessment.

Publication Types:
    Multicenter Study

PMID: 12428786 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR69: Bioinformatics. 2002 Nov;18(11):1462-9. 

Methods for assessing reproducibility of clustering patterns observed in
analyses of microarray data.

McShane LM, Radmacher MD, Freidlin B, Yu R, Li MC, Simon R.

National Cancer Institute, Biometric Research Branch, DCTD, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892-7434, USA. lm5h@nih.gov

MOTIVATION: Recent technological advances such as cDNA microarray technology
have made it possible to simultaneously interrogate thousands of genes in a
biological specimen. A cDNA microarray experiment produces a gene expression
'profile'. Often interest lies in discovering novel subgroupings, or 'clusters',
of specimens based on their profiles, for example identification of new tumor
taxonomies. Cluster analysis techniques such as hierarchical clustering and
self-organizing maps have frequently been used for investigating structure in
microarray data. However, clustering algorithms always detect clusters, even on
random data, and it is easy to misinterpret the results without some objective
measure of the reproducibility of the clusters. RESULTS: We present statistical
methods for testing for overall clustering of gene expression profiles, and we
define easily interpretable measures of cluster-specific reproducibility that
facilitate understanding of the clustering structure. We apply these methods to
elucidate structure in cDNA microarray gene expression profiles obtained on
melanoma tumors and on prostate specimens.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12424117 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR70: Bioinformatics. 2002 Nov;18(11):1438-45. 

Comparison of microarray designs for class comparison and class discovery.

Dobbin K, Simon R.

National Cancer Institute, EPN Mailstop 7434, 6130 Executive Blvd, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. dobbinke@mail.nih.gov

MOTIVATION: Two-color microarray experiments in which an aliquot derived from a
common RNA sample is placed on each array are called reference designs.
Traditionally, microarray experiments have used reference designs, but designs
without a reference have recently been proposed as alternatives. RESULTS: We
develop a statistical model that distinguishes the different levels of variation
typically present in cancer data, including biological variation among RNA
samples, experimental error and variation attributable to phenotype. Within the
context of this model, we examine the reference design and two designs which do
not use a reference, the balanced block design and the loop design, focusing
particularly on efficiency of estimates and the performance of cluster analysis.
We calculate the relative efficiency of designs when there are a fixed number of
arrays available, and when there are a fixed number of samples available. Monte
Carlo simulation is used to compare the designs when the objective is class
discovery based on cluster analysis of the samples. The number of discrepancies
between the estimated clusters and the true clusters were significantly smaller
for the reference design than for the loop design. The efficiency of the
reference design relative to the loop and block designs depends on the relation
between inter- and intra-sample variance. These results suggest that if cluster
analysis is a major goal of the experiment, then a reference design is
preferable. If identification of differentially expressed genes is the main
concern, then design selection may involve a consideration of several factors.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12424114 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR71: Bioinformatics. 2002 Nov;18(11):1432-7. 

PRIMEGENS: robust and efficient design of gene-specific probes for microarray
analysis.

Xu D, Li G, Wu L, Zhou J, Xu Y.

Protein Informatics Group, Life Sciences Division Environmental Sciences
Division, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA. xud@ornl.gov

MOTIVATION: DNA microarray is a powerful high-throughput tool for studying gene
function and regulatory networks. Due to the problem of potential cross
hybridization, using full-length genes for microarray construction is not
appropriate in some situations. A bioinformatic tool, PRIMEGENS, has recently
been developed for the automatic design of PCR primers using DNA fragments that
are specific to individual open reading frames (ORFs). RESULTS: PRIMEGENS first
carries out a BLAST search for each target ORF against all other ORFs of the
genome to quickly identify possible homologous sequences. Then it performs
optimal sequence alignment between the target ORF and each of its homologous
ORFs using dynamic programming. PRIMEGENS uses the sequence alignments to select
gene- specific fragments, and then feeds the fragments to the Primer3 program to
design primer pairs for PCR amplification. PRIMEGENS can be run from the command
line on Unix/Linux platforms as a stand-alone package or it can be used from a
Web interface. The program runs efficiently, and it takes a few seconds per
sequence on a typical workstation. PCR primers specific to individual ORFs from
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 and Deinococcus radiodurans R1 have been designed.
The PCR amplification results indicate that this method is very efficient and
reliable for designing specific probes for microarray analysis.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12424113 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR72: Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Nov 1;30(21):e116. 

A common reference for cDNA microarray hybridizations.

Sterrenburg E, Turk R, Boer JM, van Ommen GB, den Dunnen JT.

Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333AL Leiden, Nederland.

Comparisons of expression levels across different cDNA microarray experiments
are easier when a common reference is co-hybridized to every microarray. Often
this reference consists of one experimental control sample, a pool of cell lines
or a mix of all samples to be analyzed. We have developed an alternative common
reference consisting of a mix of the products that are spotted on the array.
Pooling part of the cDNA PCR products before they are printed and their
subsequent amplification towards either sense or antisense cRNA provides an
excellent common reference. Our results show that this reference yields a
reproducible hybridization signal in 99.5% of the cDNA probes spotted on the
array. Accordingly, a ratio can be calculated for every spot, and expression
levels across different hybridizations can be compared. In dye-swap experiments
this reference shows no significant ratio differences, with 95% of the spots
within an interval of +/-0.2-fold change. The described method can be used in
hybridizations with both amplified and non-amplified targets, is time saving and
provides a constant batch of common reference that lasts for thousands of
hybridizations.

PMID: 12409475 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR73: Biotechnol Prog. 2002 Sep-Oct;18(5):1126-9. 

Picoliter-scale protein microarrays by laser direct write.

Ringeisen BR, Wu PK, Kim H, Pique A, Auyeung RY, Young HD, Chrisey DB, Krizman
DB.

Naval Research Laboratory, Washington DC 20375, USA. ringeisn@ccs.nrl.navy.mil

We demonstrate the accurate picoliter-scale dispensing of active proteins using
a novel laser transfer technique. Droplets of protein solution are dispensed
onto functionalized glass slides and into plastic microwells, activating as
small as 50-microm diameter areas on these surfaces. Protein microarrays
fabricated by laser transfer were assayed using standard fluorescent labeling
techniques to demonstrate successful protein and antigen binding. These results
indicate that laser transfer does not damage the active site of the dispensed
protein and that this technique can be used to successfully fabricate a
functioning protein microarray. Also, as a result of the efficient nature of the
process, material usage is reduced by two to four orders of magnitude compared
to conventional pin dispensing methods for protein spotting.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 12363367 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR74: J Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Sep 30;35(5):532-5. 

A method for evaluation of the quality of DNA microarray spots.

Boa Z, Ma WL, Hu ZY, Rong S, Shi YB, Zheng WL.

Department of Biochemistry, First Military Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
PR China.

To establish a method to evaluate the quality of the printed microarray and DNA
fragments' immobilization. The target gene fragments that were made with the
restriction display PCR (RD-PCR) technique were printed on a superamine modified
glass slide, then immobilized with UV cross-linking and heat. This chip was
hybridized with universal primers that were labeled with cy3-dUTP, as well as
cDNA that was labeled with cy3-dCTP, as the conventional protocol. Most of the
target gene fragments on the chip showed positive signals, but the negative
control showed no signal, and vice versa. We established a method that enables
an effective evaluation of the quality of the microarrays.

PMID: 12359098 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR75: Virology. 2002 Sep 1;300(2):171-9. 

Sequence diversity of Jeryl Lynn strain of mumps virus: quantitative mutant
analysis for vaccine quality control.

Amexis G, Rubin S, Chizhikov V, Pelloquin F, Carbone K, Chumakov K.

Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA Rockville, Maryland 20852,
USA.

The Jeryl Lynn strain of mumps vaccine live (MVL) was developed in 1966 by Merck
Co. and has been widely used in the U.S. and other countries since the early
1970s. Partial sequencing has recently shown that the vaccine contains a mixture
of two substrains with substantially different nucleotide sequences. We have
determined the complete genomic sequences of both substrains and identified 414
nucleotide differences (2.69%), leading to 87 amino acid substitutions (1.67%).
We used this information to develop methods for quantification of the substrain
components in vaccine samples based on PCR and restriction enzyme cleavage and
oligonucleotide microarray hybridization and monitored their dynamics in viral
populations propagated in different conditions. Passaging Jeryl Lynn strain in
Vero or CEF cell cultures resulted in rapid selection of the major component
JL1, while growth in embryonated chicken eggs (ECE) favored accumulation of the
minor component JL2. Based on the findings presented here, it is proposed that
the substrain composition of Jeryl Lynn vaccine can be monitored as a part of
its quality control to ensure consistency of the vaccine.

PMID: 12350348 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR76: BMC Microbiol. 2002 Sep 20;2(1):27. 

Bacterial discrimination by means of a universal array approach mediated by LDR
(ligase detection reaction).

Busti E, Bordoni R, Castiglioni B, Monciardini P, Sosio M, Donadio S, Consolandi
C, Rossi Bernardi L, Battaglia C, De Bellis G.

1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Universita' di Milano, via
F.lli Cervi, 93 20090 Segrate (MI), Italy. ebusti@biosearch.it

BACKGROUND: PCR amplification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes provides the most
comprehensive and flexible means of sampling bacterial communities. Sequence
analysis of these cloned fragments can provide a qualitative and quantitative
insight of the microbial population under scrutiny although this approach is not
suited to large-scale screenings. Other methods, such as denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis, heteroduplex or terminal restriction fragment analysis are
rapid and therefore amenable to field-scale experiments. A very recent addition
to these analytical tools is represented by microarray technology. RESULTS: Here
we present our results using a Universal DNA Microarray approach as an
analytical tool for bacterial discrimination. The proposed procedure is based on
the properties of the DNA ligation reaction and requires the design of two
probes specific for each target sequence. One oligo carries a fluorescent label
and the other a unique sequence (cZipCode or complementary ZipCode) which
identifies a ligation product. Ligated fragments, obtained in presence of a
proper template (a PCR amplified fragment of the 16s rRNA gene) contain either
the fluorescent label or the unique sequence and therefore are addressed to the
location on the microarray where the ZipCode sequence has been spotted. Such an
array is therefore "Universal" being unrelated to a specific molecular analysis.
Here we present the design of probes specific for some groups of bacteria and
their application to bacterial diagnostics. CONCLUSIONS: The combined use of
selective probes, ligation reaction and the Universal Array approach yielded an
analytical procedure with a good power of discrimination among bacteria.

PMID: 12243651 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR77: Biotechniques. 2002 Sep;33(3):564, 566-70. 

Linear amplification of catalyzed reporter deposition technology on nylon
membrane microarray.

Lau WK, Chiu SK, Ma JT, Tzeng CM.

U-Vision Biotech, Taipei, Taiwan.

The application of microarray analysis to gene expression from limited tissue
samples has not been very successful because of the poor signal qualityfrom the
genes expressed at low levels. Here we discussed the use of catalyzed reporter
deposition (CARD) technology to amplify signals from limited RNA samples on
nylon membrane cDNA microarray. When the input RNA level was greater than 10
microg, the genes expressed at high levels did not amplify in proportion to
those expressed at low levels. Compared to conventional colorimetric detection,
the CARD method requires less than 10% of the total RNA used for amplification
of signal displayed onto a nylon membrane cDNA microarray. Total RNA (5-10
microg), as one can extract from a limited amount of specimen, was determined to
produce a linear correlation between the colorimetric detection and CARD
methods. Beyond this range, it can cause a nonlinear amplification of highly
expressed and low-abundance genes. These results suggest that when amplification
is needed for any applications using the CARD method, including DNA microarray
experiments, precaution has to be taken in the amount of RNA used to avoid skew
amplification and thus misleading conclusions.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Technical Report

PMID: 12238767 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR78: Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol. 2002;77:113-39. 

Microarray data representation, annotation and storage.

Brazma A, Sarkans U, Robinson A, Vilo J, Vingron M, Hoheisel J, Fellenberg K.

EMBL Outstation-Hinxton, European Bioinformatics Institute, Cambridge, UK.
brazma@ebi.ac.uk

Management and analysis of the huge amounts of data produced by microarray
experiments is becoming one of the major bottlenecks in the utilization of this
high-throughput technology. We describe the basic design of a microarray gene
expression database to help microarray users and their informatics teams to set
up their information services. We describe two data models--a simpler one called
ArrayExpressB and the complete model ArrayExpressC, and discuss some
implementation issues. For latest developments see http:
wwwebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress

PMID: 12227734 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR79: Genome Biol. 2002 Jul 25;3(8):RESEARCH0041. Epub 2002 Jul 25. 

Identification of Schistosoma mansoni gender-associated gene transcripts by cDNA
microarray profiling.

Hoffmann KF, Johnston DA, Dunne DW.

Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK. kfh24@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Parasitic helminths of the genus Schistosoma mate, achieve sexual
maturity and produce eggs in the bloodstream of their definitive hosts, and the
most important pathological consequences of the infection are associated with
this process. We have used cDNA microarray technology to initiate genome-wide
gene-expression studies of sex and sexual development in mature Schistosoma
mansoni parasites. RESULTS: An S. mansoni-specific cDNA microarray was
fabricated using 576 expressed sequence tags selected from three cDNA libraries
and originating from two different parasite developmental stages. Five
independent cDNA microarray hybridizations were analyzed using stringent
filtering criteria and careful quality control, leading to the identification of
12 new female-associated and 4 new male-associated gene transcripts in the
mature adult schistosome. Statistical analysis of variation demonstrated high
levels of agreement within a cDNA microarray (correlation coefficient 0.91;
median coefficient of variation 11.1%) and between cDNA microarrays (correlation
coefficient 0.90; median coefficient of variation 14.4%). RT-PCR analysis
confirmed the cDNA microarray results, thereby supporting the reliability of the
system. CONCLUSIONS: Our study expands the list of S. mansoni gender-associated
gene transcripts from all previous studies by a factor of two. Among the new
associations identified, a tyrosinase ortholog was preferentially expressed in
the adult female, and a dynein light-chain ortholog was highly induced in the
adult male. cDNA microarrays offer the potential for exponential leaps in the
understanding of parasite biology and this study shows how molecules involved in
sexual biology can be rapidly identified.

Publication Types:
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12186648 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR80: Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2002 Jun;13(3):204-7. 

Challenges in applying microarrays to environmental studies.

Zhou J, Thompson DK.

Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, PO Box 2008, Oak
Ridge, TN 37831, USA. zhouj@ornl.gov

Although DNA microarray technology has been used successfully to analyze global
gene expression in pure cultures, it has not been rigorously tested and
evaluated within the context of complex environmental samples. Adapting
microarray hybridization for use in environmental studies faces several
challenges associated with specificity, sensitivity and quantitation.

PMID: 12180093 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR81: Bioinformatics. 2002 Aug;18(8):1139-40. 

MArray: analysing single, replicated or reversed microarray experiments.

Wang J, Nygaard V, Smith-Sorensen B, Hovig E, Myklebost O.

Department of Tumour Biology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, N0310 Oslo, Norway.
junbaiw@radium.uio.no

MArray is a Matlab toolbox with a graphical user interface that allows the user
to analyse single or paired microarray datasets by direct input of the raw data
output file from image analysis packages, such as QuantArray or GenePiX. The
application provides simple procedures to manually evaluate the quality of each
measurement, multiple approaches to both ratio normalization (simple
normalization, intensity dependent normalization) and evaluation of the
reproducibility of paired experiments (using the techniques 'simple statistical
method' and 'quality control ellipse' and 'significance analysis of
microarrays'). Specifically, interactive spot evaluation functions are available
in MArray and an online gene information database (NCBI UniGene) is linked. The
application may provide a valuable aid in selecting and optimizing experimental
procedures, as well as serving as an analytical tool for two-state biological
comparisons, such as a study of single-dose activation. It is entirely platform
independent, and only requires Matlab installed. AVAILABILITY:
http://matrise.uio.no/marray/marray.html

PMID: 12176840 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR82: Bioinformatics. 2002 Aug;18(8):1054-63. 

Mapping physiological states from microarray expression measurements.

Stephanopoulos G, Hwang D, Schmitt WA, Misra J, Stephanopoulos G.

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Room
56-469, Cambridge 02139, USA. gregstep@mit.edu

MOTIVATION: The increasing use of DNA microarrays to probe cell physiology
requires methods for visualizing different expression phenotypes and explicitly
connecting individual genes to discriminating expression features. Such methods
should be robust and maintain biological interpretability. RESULTS: We propose a
method for the mapping of the physiological state of cells and tissues from
multidimensional expression data such as those obtained with DNA microarrays.
The method uses Fisher discriminant analysis to create a linear projection of
gene expression measurements that maximizes the separation of different sample
classes. Relative to other typical classification methods, this method provides
insights into the discriminating characteristics of expression measurements in
terms of the contribution of individual genes to the definition of distinct
physiological states. This projection method also facilitates visualization of
classification results in a reduced dimensional space. Examples from four
different cases demonstrate the ability of the method to produce well-separated
groups in the projection space and to identify important genes for defining
physiological states. The method can be augmented to also include data from the
proteomic and metabolic phenotypes and can be useful in disease diagnosis, drug
screening and bioprocessing applications.

PMID: 12176828 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR83: Nat Biotechnol. 2002 Sep;20(9):940-3. Epub 2002 Aug 12. 

Representation is faithfully preserved in global cDNA amplified exponentially
from sub-picogram quantities of mRNA.

Iscove NN, Barbara M, Gu M, Gibson M, Modi C, Winegarden N.

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Ontario Cancer Institute, 610
University Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9. iscove@uhnres.utoronto.ca

Analysis of transcript representation on gene microarrays requires microgram
amounts of total RNA or DNA. Without amplification, such amounts are obtainable
only from millions of cells. However, it may be desirable to determine
transcript representation in few or even single cells in aspiration biopsies,
rare population subsets isolated by cell sorting or laser capture, or
micromanipulated single cells. Nucleic-acid amplification methods could be used
in these cases, but it is difficult to amplify different transcripts in a sample
without distorting quantitative relationships between them. Linear isothermal
RNA amplification has been used to amplify as little as 10 ng of total cellular
RNA, corresponding to the amount obtainable from thousands of cells, while still
preserving the original abundance relationships. However, the available
procedures require multiple steps, are labor intensive and time consuming, and
have not been shown to preserve abundance information from smaller starting
amounts. Exponential amplification, on the other hand, is a relatively simple
technology, but is generally considered to bias abundance relationships
unacceptably. These constraints have placed beyond current reach the secure and
routine application of microarray analysis to single or small numbers of cells.
Here we describe results obtained with a rapid and highly optimized global
reverse transcription#150;PCR (RT-PCR) procedure. Contrary to prevalent
expectations, the exponential approach preserves abundance relationships through
amplification as high as 3 x 10(11)-fold. Further, it reduces by a million-fold
the input amount of RNA needed for microarray analysis, and yields reproducible
results from the picogram range of total RNA obtainable from single cells.

Publication Types:
    Technical Report

PMID: 12172558 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR84: Bioinformatics. 2002;18 Suppl 1:S155-63. 

Statistical process control for large scale microarray experiments.

Model F, Konig T, Piepenbrock C, Adorjan P.

Epigenomics AG, Kastanienallee 24, Berlin, D-10435, Germany.
Fabian.Model@epigenomics.com

MOTIVATION: Maintaining and controlling data quality is a key problem in large
scale microarray studies. In particular systematic changes in experimental
conditions across multiple chips can seriously affect quality and even lead to
false biological conclusions. Traditionally the influence of these effects can
be minimized only by expensive repeated measurements, because a detailed
understanding of all process relevant parameters seems impossible. RESULTS: We
introduce a novel method for microarray process control that estimates quality
based solely on the distribution of the actual measurements without requiring
repeated experiments. A robust version of principle component analysis detects
single outlier microarrays and thereby enables the use of techniques from
multivariate statistical process control. In particular, the T(2) control chart
reliably tracks undesired changes in process relevant parameters. This can be
used to improve the microarray process itself, limits necessary repetitions to
only affected samples and therefore maintains quality in a cost effective way.
We prove the power of the approach on 3 large sets of DNA methylation microarray
data.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies
    Validation Studies

PMID: 12169543 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR85: J Clin Pathol. 2002 Aug;55(8):613-5. 

Comment in:
    J Clin Pathol. 2002 Aug;55(8):575-6.

Tissue microarrays: a new approach for quality control in immunohistochemistry.

Packeisen J, Buerger H, Krech R, Boecker W.

Department of Pathology, Klinikum Osnabrueck, Am Finkenhuegel 1, 49076
Osnabrueck, Germany. jpackeisen@pathoweb.de

AIMS: To improve the interpretation of immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
results the use of a tissue microarray technique was established in a routine
setting. METHODS: A tissue microarray was constructed by harvesting 600 microm
tissue cores from paraffin wax embedded samples available in a routine pathology
department. The punches originating from non-tumorous tissue were placed on host
paraffin wax blocks. The microarray contained 12 different tissue samples, with
a wide antigen profile and a dimension of 3.5 x 3 mm. One section of the
multitissue array was placed as an "internal" positive control on each slide of
the patient tissue to undergo identical immunohistochemical procedures. RESULTS:
Using the tissue microarray technique as a tool for internal quality control,
the interpretation of immunohistochemical staining of more than 20 different
antigens in routine IHC was improved. The tissue microarray did not influence
the staining results in conventional IHC or in different automated IHC settings.
CONCLUSION: The regular use of an institution adapted tissue microarray would be
useful for internal positive control in IHC to enable different laboratory
demands. Furthermore, this technique improves the evaluation of staining results
in IHC.

PMID: 12147657 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR86: Biotechniques. 2002 Jul;33(1):176-9. 

High-quality RNA from cells isolated by laser capture microdissection.

Mikulowska-Mennis A, Taylor TB, Vishnu P, Michie SA, Raja R, Horner N, Kunitake
ST.

Arcturus, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA. amennis@arctur.com

Laser capture microdissection (LCM) provides a rapid and simple method for
procuring homogeneous populations of cells. However, reproducible isolation of
intact RNAfrom these cells can be problematic; the sample may deteriorate before
or during sectioning, RNA may degrade during slide staining and LCM, and
inadequate extraction and isolation methods may lead to poor recovery. Our
report describes an optimized protocol for preparation of frozen sections for
LCM using the HistoGene Frozen Section Staining Kit. This slide preparation
method is combined with the PicoPure RNA Isolation Kitfor extraction and
isolation of RNA from low numbers of microdissected cells. The procedure is easy
to perform, rapid, and reproducible. Our results show that the RNA isolated from
the LCM samples prepared according to our protocol is of high quality. The RNA
maintains its integrity as shown by RT-PCR detection of genes of different
abundance levels and by electrophoretic analysis of ribosomal RNA. RNA obtained
by this method has also been used to synthesize probes for interrogating cDNA
microarray analyses to study expression levels of thousands of genes from LCM
samples.

PMID: 12139243 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR87: BMC Genomics. 2002 Jul 17;3(1):19. Epub 2002 Jul 17. 

Defining signal thresholds in DNA microarrays: exemplary application for
invasive cancer.

Bilban M, Buehler LK, Head S, Desoye G, Quaranta V.

The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, USA. mbilban@scripps.edu

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide or application-targeted microarrays containing a subset
of genes of interest have become widely used as a research tool with the
prospect of diagnostic application. Intrinsic variability of microarray
measurements poses a major problem in defining signal thresholds for
absent/present or differentially expressed genes. Most strategies have used
fold-change threshold values, but variability at low signal intensities may
invalidate this approach and it does not provide information about
false-positives and false negatives. RESULTS: We introduce a method to filter
false-positives and false-negatives from DNA microarray experiments. This is
achieved by evaluating a set of positive and negative controls by receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. As an advantage of this approach, users
may define thresholds on the basis of sensitivity and specificity
considerations. The area under the ROC curve allows quality control of
microarray hybridizations. This method has been applied to custom made
microarrays developed for the analysis of invasive melanoma derived tumor cells.
It demonstrated that ROC analysis yields a threshold with reduced missclassified
genes in microarray experiments. CONCLUSIONS: Provided that a set of appropriate
positive and negative controls is included on the microarray, ROC analysis
obviates the inherent problem of arbitrarily selecting threshold levels in
microarray experiments. The proposed method is applicable to both custom made
and commercially available DNA microarrays and will help to improve the
reliability of predictions from DNA microarray experiments.

PMID: 12123529 [PubMed]



NR88: Bioinformatics. 2002 Jul;18(7):953-60. 

Quantitative assessment of filter-based cDNA microarrays: gene expression
profiles of human T-lymphoma cell lines.

Dodson JM, Charles PT, Stenger DA, Pancrazio JJ.

Center for Bio/Molecular Science & Engineering, Code 6900, Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA.

MOTIVATION: While the use of cDNA microarrays for functional genomic analysis
has become commonplace, relatively little attention has been placed on false
positives, i.e. the likelihood that a change in measured radioactive or
fluorescence intensity may reflect a change in gene expression when, in fact,
there is none. Since cDNA arrays are being increasingly used to rapidly
distinguish biomarkers for disease detection and subsequent assay development
(Wellman et al., Blood, 96, 398-404, 2000), the impact of false positives can be
significant. For the use of this technology, it is necessary to develop
quantitative criteria for reduction of false positives with
radioactively-labeled cDNA arrays. RESULTS: We used a single source of RNA
(HuT78 T lymphoma cells) to eliminate sample variation and quantitatively
examined intensity ratios using radioactively labeled cDNA microarrays.
Variation in intensity ratios was reduced by processing microarrays in
side-by-side (parallel mode) rather than by using the same microarray for two
hybridizations (sequential mode). Based on statistical independence, calculation
of the expected number of false positives as a function of threshold showed that
a detection limit of [log(2)R] >0.65 with agreement from three replicates could
be used to identify up- or down-modulated genes. Using this quantitative
criteria, gene expression differences between two related T lymphoma cell lines,
HuT78 and H9, were identified. The relevance of these findings to the known
functional differences between these cell types is discussed.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 12117793 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR89: Biotechniques. 2002 Jun;32(6):1316-20. 

Local mean normalization of microarray element signal intensities across an
array surface: quality control and correction of spatially systematic artifacts.

Colantuoni C, Henry G, Zeger S, Pevsner J.

Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Here we present a methodology for the normalization of element signal
intensities to a mean intensity calculated locally across the surface of a DNA
microarray. These methods allow the detection and/or correction of spatially
systematic artifacts in microarray data. These include artifacts that can be
introduced during the robotic printing, hybridization, washing, or imaging of
microarrays. Using array element signal intensities alone, this local mean
normalization process can correct for such artifacts because they vary across
the surface of the array. The local mean normalization can be usedfor quality
control and data correction purposes in the analysis of microarray data. These
algorithms assume that array elements are not spatially ordered with regard to
sequence or biological function and require that this spatial mapping is
identical between the two sets of intensities to be compared. The tool described
in this report was developed in the R statistical language and is freely
available on the Internet as part of a larger gene expression analysis package.
This Web implementation is interactive and user-friendly and allows the easy use
of the local mean normalization tool described here, without programming
expertise or downloading of additional software.

PMID: 12074162 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR90: J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2002 Mar;28(3):180-5. 

Microarray technology GEM microarrays and drug discovery.

Reynolds MA.

Incyte Genomics, Fremont, CA 94555, USA.

Incyte Genomics' GEM Gene Expression Microarray is a proven genomics tool used
by a large number of pharmaceutical companies to speed up the drug discovery and
development process. The development and integration of this technology,
together with Incyte's sequence databases and clone resources, have resulted in
GEM microarrays that span approximately 60,000 human genes as well as
approximately 60,000 plant, rat, mouse, yeast, and bacterial genes. The
technology underlying the use of these arrays and their application to the drug
discovery process is highlighted.

PMID: 12074093 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR91: Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 15;30(12):e54. 

Microarray optimizations: increasing spot accuracy and automated identification
of true microarray signals.

Tran PH, Peiffer DA, Shin Y, Meek LM, Brody JP, Cho KW.

Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California at
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

In this paper, fluorescent microarray images and various analysis techniques are
described to improve the microarray data acquisition processes. Signal
intensities produced by rarely expressed genes are initially correctly detected,
but they are often lost in corrections for background, log or ratio. Our
analyses indicate that a simple correlation between the mean and median signal
intensities may be the best way to eliminate inaccurate microarray signals.
Unlike traditional quality control methods, the low intensity signals are
retained and inaccurate signals are eliminated in this mean and median
correlation. With larger amounts of microarray data being generated, it becomes
increasingly more difficult to analyze data on a visual basis. Our method allows
for the automatic quantitative determination of accurate and reliable signals,
which can then be used for normalization. We found that a mean to median
correlation of 85% or higher not only retains more data than current methods,
but the retained data is more accurate than traditional thresholds or common
spot flagging algorithms. We have also found that by using pin microtapping and
microvibrations, we can control spot quality independent from initial PCR
volume.

PMID: 12060692 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR92: Trends Genet. 2002 May;18(5):265-71. 

Statistical issues with microarrays: processing and analysis.

Nadon R, Shoemaker J.

Imaging Research Inc., Brock University, 500 Glenridge Ave, St Catharines,
Ontario, Canada L2S 3A1. Robert.Nadon@imagingresearch.com

The study of gene expression with printed arrays and prefabricated chips is
evolving from a qualitative to a quantitative science. Statistical procedures
for determining quality control, differential expression, and reproducibility of
findings are a natural consequence of this evolution. However, problems inherent
to the technologies have raised important issues of how to apply adequate
statistical tests. As a consequence, statistical approaches to microarray
research are not yet as routine as they are in other sciences. Statistical
methods, tailored to microarrays, continue to be adapted and developed. We
present an overview of these methods and of outstanding issues in their use and
validation.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12047952 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR93: Biotechniques. 2002 May;32(5):1051-2, 1054, 1056-7. 

Nondestructive quality control for microarray production.

Shearstone JR, Allaire NE, Getman ME, Perrin S.

Transcriptional Profiling Group, Biogen Inc., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
jeff_shearstone@biogen.com

The use of microarrays to monitor gene expression has become a standard research
tool at both academic and industrial research institutions. Quality control of
common printing defects during DNA deposition onto glass substrates is critical
to maintaining data integrity and preventing the needless consumption of
precious RNA, labeling reagents, and time. Here we demonstrate a nondestructive
method for monitoring the quality of every spot on every chip of a microarray
production run. We have identified many common manufacturing defects, while not
perturbing the attachment of our oligonucleotide target to the substrate or
altering further hybridization. This protocol is simple, fast, and inexpensive.

Publication Types:
    Technical Report

PMID: 12019778 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR94: Bioinformatics. 2002 Mar;18(3):423-33. 

Microarray data warehouse allowing for inclusion of experiment annotations in
statistical analysis.

Fellenberg K, Hauser NC, Brors B, Hoheisel JD, Vingron M.

Department of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center, PO Box
101949, D-69009 Heidelberg, Germany. k.fellenberg@dkfz.de

MOTIVATION: Microarray technology provides access to expression levels of
thousands of genes at once, producing large amounts of data. These datasets are
valuable only if they are annotated by sufficiently detailed experiment
descriptions. However, in many databases a substantial number of these
annotations is in free-text format and not readily accessible to computer-aided
analysis. RESULTS: The Multi-Conditional Hybridization Intensity Processing
System (M-CHIPS), a data warehousing concept, focuses on providing both
structure and algorithms suitable for statistical analysis of a microarray
database's entire contents including the experiment annotations. It addresses
the rapid growth of the amount of hybridization data, more detailed experimental
descriptions, and new kinds of experiments in the future. We have developed a
storage concept, a particular instance of which is an organism-specific
database. Although these databases may contain different ontologies of
experiment annotations, they share the same structure and therefore can be
accessed by the very same statistical algorithms. Experiment ontologies have not
yet reached their final shape, and standards are reduced to minimal conventions
that do not yet warrant extensive description. An ontology-independent structure
enables updates of annotation hierarchies during normal database operation
without altering the structure. AVAILABILITY AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
http://www.dkfz.de/tbi/services/mchips

PMID: 11934741 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR95: J Comput Biol. 2002;9(1):1-22. 

Quality control in manufacturing oligo arrays: a combinatorial design approach.

Sengupta R, Tompa M.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-2350, USA. rimli@cs.washington.edu

The advent of the DNA microarray technology has brought with it the exciting
possibility of simultaneously observing the expression levels of all genes in an
organism. One such microarray technology, called "oligo arrays," manufactures
short single strands of DNA (called probes) onto a glass surface using
photolithography. An altered or missed step in such a manufacturing protocol can
adversely affect all probes using this failed step and is in general impossible
to disentangle from experimental variation when using such a defective array.
The idea of designing special quality control probes to detect a failed step was
first formulated by Hubbell and Pevzner (1999). We consider an alternative
formulation of this problem and use a combinatorial design approach to solve it.
Our results improve over prior work in guaranteeing coverage of all protocol
steps and in being able to tolerate a greater number of unreliable probe
intensities.

PMID: 11911792 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR96: Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Mar;8(3):794-801. 

The feasibility of using fine needle aspiration from primary breast cancers for
cDNA microarray analyses.

Assersohn L, Gangi L, Zhao Y, Dowsett M, Simon R, Powles TJ, Liu ET.

Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey SM2 5PT, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Our aims in this pilot study were to determine whether fine needle
aspirates (FNAs) provide a sufficient quantity of mRNA for cDNA microarray
analysis, produce a set of quality control criteria to accept individual arrays,
and determine whether gene expression profiles obtained from FNAs were
representative of the source tumor. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty-seven women with
breast cancer for treatment with primary surgery had a FNA before and at the
time of surgery, and a portion of excised tumor was taken for array analysis.
Control experiments were performed using two Ewing's sarcoma xenograft models.
mRNA was extracted from the samples and hybridized with the reference (MCF7 cell
line) on cDNA microarrays. Statistical methods were applied to identify
acceptability criteria for the arrays. RESULTS: Statistical analyses
demonstrated that an adequate array could be identified by calculating the SD of
the log of fluorescence intensities from the arrays. Using this criterion, only
4 of the 27 patients (15%) had FNA samples suitable for array analysis. Gene
expression profiles from the FNAs closely resembled that of the corresponding
source tumors and were clearly distinguished from FNAs derived from the
xenografts. CONCLUSIONS: SD is a useful quality index for the clinical
application of cDNA microarrays. This "proof of principle" study demonstrates
that FNAs from primary breast cancers can be used for microarray analysis,
although without amplification, it is feasible in only a small proportion of
patients. For this to be clinically useful, validated amplification techniques
for FNA samples are probably required.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 11895911 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR97: Eur J Cancer. 2001 Oct;37 Suppl 7:S5-17. 

What the clinician needs from the pathologist: evidence-based reporting in
breast cancer.

Going JJ, Mallon EA, Leake RE, Bartlett JM, Gusterson BA.

Department of Pathology, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Histopathology has a vital role in determining breast cancer management and
pathologists must be part of the clinical team. Carcinoma size, grade, and
especially lymph node status remain the best available prognostic factors.
Metastatic carcinoma in axillary nodes is more important than any other
prognostic factor presently available. ER status is an important predictor of
response to endocrine manipulation, but its independent prognostic significance,
and that of micrometastatic disease, circulating carcinoma cells and other
molecular factors, even well-studied ones such as HER2 status, are less clear.
Pathology is the first clinical speciality to subject its practice to rigorous
scientific analysis, and it has stood up well. However, workers without
appropriate experience in Pathology or scientific design have created
difficulties by undertaking poorly planned studies with ill-defined end-points,
lacking appropriate quality control. New analytical techniques and therapeutic
targets make it essential that we learn from past mistakes and integrate
pathologists into the research teams pursing clinical trials and the assessment
of new bio-markers. Without this, input resource will be wasted on false leads
that could have been curtailed. Morphology alone will not be enough to select
patients likely to benefit in trials of new therapies, but selection 'tests'
must be appropriate. The confusion of tests for selection of patients to receive
Herceptin shows what happens when this process fails. Much of the microarray
data being put into data-bases has no quality control, and meta-analysis of this
data will produce even more conflict than the clinical trials. This can be
avoided, as the ability to standardise is available.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11888005 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR98: Biotechniques. 2002 Feb;32(2):330-2, 334, 336. 

Correcting for signal saturation errors in the analysis of microarray data.

Hsiao LL, Jensen RV, Yoshida T, Clark KE, Blumenstock JE, Gullans SR.

Brigham and Women's Hosppital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

A variety of technical errors have arisen in data analysis when using cDNA or
oligonucleotide microarrays. One of the most insidious problems is the
saturation of the hybridization signal of high-abundant transcripts. This
problem arises from the truncation of the laser fluorescence signal. When the
hybridization signal on the microarray is very strong, this truncation can
result in serious consequences that may not be readily apparent to the user. As
an illustration of this problem, two subclasses of normal human tissue samples
(six liver and six lung samples) were analyzed with GeneChip probe arrays to
evaluate the patterns of expression for approximately 7000 human genes. Five of
these data sets were found to suffer from signal truncation. This caused several
tissues to be incorrectly classified using hierarchical clustering. To rectify
this problem so that the gene expression data could be properly compared and
clustered, we developed a "filtering" procedure that identifies a subset of
genes least affected by the signal saturation. This filtering procedure can be
obtained at www.hugeindex.org.

PMID: 11848410 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR99: Biotechniques. 2002 Feb;32(2):312-4. 

Microgel assessment of nucleic acid integrity and labeling quality in microarray
experiments.

Lage JM, Hamann S, Gribanov O, Leamon JH, Pejovic T, Lizardi PM.

Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 11848407 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR100: Genome Biol. 2001;2(11):RESEARCH0047. Epub 2001 Oct 18. 

Sources of nonlinearity in cDNA microarray expression measurements.

Ramdas L, Coombes KR, Baggerly K, Abruzzo L, Highsmith WE, Krogmann T, Hamilton
SR, Zhang W.

Department of Pathology, University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. wzhang@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: A key assumption in the analysis of microarray data is that the
quantified signal intensities are linearly related to the expression levels of
the corresponding genes. To test this assumption, we experimentally examined the
relationship between signal and expression for the two types of microarrays we
most commonly encounter: radioactively labeled cDNAs on nylon membranes and
fluorescently labeled cDNAs on glass slides. RESULTS: We uncovered two sources
of nonlinearity. The first, which led to discrepancies in analysis affecting the
fluorescent signals, was signal quenching associated with excessive dye
concentrations. The second, affecting the radioactive signals, was a nonlinear
transformation of the raw data introduced by the scanner. Correction for this
transformation was made by some, but not all, image-quantification software
packages. CONCLUSIONS: The second type of nonlinearity is more troublesome,
because it could not have been predicted a priori. Both types of nonlinearities
were detected by simple dilution series, which we recommend as a quality-control
step.

PMID: 11737946 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR101: J Bacteriol. 2001 Dec;183(24):7371-80. 

RNA expression analysis using an antisense Bacillus subtilis genome array.

Lee JM, Zhang S, Saha S, Santa Anna S, Jiang C, Perkins J.

Roche Vitamins Inc., Nutley, New Jersey 07110, USA.

We have developed an antisense oligonucleotide microarray for the study of gene
expression and regulation in Bacillus subtilis by using Affymetrix technology.
Quality control tests of the B. subtilis GeneChip were performed to ascertain
the quality of the array. These tests included optimization of the labeling and
hybridization conditions, determination of the linear dynamic range of gene
expression levels, and assessment of differential gene expression patterns of
known vitamin biosynthetic genes. In minimal medium, we detected transcripts for
approximately 70% of the known open reading frames (ORFs). In addition, we were
able to monitor the transcript level of known biosynthetic genes regulated by
riboflavin, biotin, or thiamine. Moreover, novel transcripts were also detected
within intergenic regions and on the opposite coding strand of known ORFs.
Several of these novel transcripts were subsequently correlated to new coding
regions.

PMID: 11717296 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR102: Biotechniques. 2001 Sep;31(3):546, 548, 550, passim. 

Comparative evaluation of laser-based microarray scanners.

Ramdas L, Wang J, Hu L, Cogdell D, Taylor E, Zhang W.

The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Laboratories use different laser-based scanners to scan microarray images. To
assess whether results from different scanners are comparable, and thus whether
data from different laboratories can be compared, we scanned the same microarray
slide with three commercial scanners that use different imaging techniques.
After the acquisition of the microarray images produced by the three scanners,
the images were quantified using a single imaging software package and protocol.
The results were compared, and we found that the data obtained from the three
scanners were comparable and that the variations caused by the use of different
instruments were negligible, in spite of the fact that the scanners were based
on different optical imaging techniques.

Publication Types:
    Technical Report

PMID: 11570499 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR103: J Pathol. 2001 Sep;195(1):72-9. 

Tissue microarray (TMA) technology: miniaturized pathology archives for
high-throughput in situ studies.

Bubendorf L, Nocito A, Moch H, Sauter G.

Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, 4003 Basel, Switzerland.

Tissue microarray (TMA) technology allows a massive acceleration of studies
correlating molecular in situ findings with clinico-pathological information. In
this technique, cylindrical tissue samples are taken from up to 1000 different
archival tissue blocks and subsequently placed into one empty 'recipient'
paraffin block. Sections from TMA blocks can be used for all different types of
in situ tissue analyses including immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization. Multiple studies have demonstrated that findings obtained on TMAs
are highly representative of their donor tissues, despite the small size of the
individual specimens (diameter 0.6 mm). It is anticipated that TMAs will soon
become a widely used tool for all types of tissue-based research. The
availability of TMAs containing highly characterized tissues will enable every
researcher to perform studies involving thousands of tumours rapidly. Therefore,
TMAs will lead to a significant acceleration of the transition of basic research
findings into clinical applications. Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11568893 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR104: Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Aug 1;29(15):E75-5. 

Quantitative quality control in microarray image processing and data
acquisition.

Wang X, Ghosh S, Guo SW.

Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Medical College and
Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI
53226, USA. xujing@mcw.edu

A new integrated image analysis package with quantitative quality control
schemes is described for cDNA microarray technology. The package employs an
iterative algorithm that utilizes both intensity characteristics and spatial
information of the spots on a microarray image for signal-background
segmentation and defines five quality scores for each spot to record
irregularities in spot intensity, size and background noise levels. A composite
score q(com) is defined based on these individual scores to give an overall
assessment of spot quality. Using q(com) we demonstrate that the inherent
variability in intensity ratio measurements is closely correlated with spot
quality, namely spots with higher quality give less variable measurements and
vice versa. In addition, gauging data by q(com) can improve data reliability
dramatically and efficiently. We further show that the variability in ratio
measurements drops exponentially with increasing q(com) and, for the majority of
spots at the high quality end, this improvement is mainly due to an improvement
in correlation between the two dyes. Based on these studies, we discuss the
potential of quantitative quality control for microarray data and the
possibility of filtering and normalizing microarray data using a quality
metrics-dependent scheme.

PMID: 11470890 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR105: Biotechniques. 2001 Jul;31(1):62-5. 

Sequence verification as quality-control step for production of cDNA
microarrays.

Taylor E, Cogdell D, Coombes K, Hu L, Ramdas L, Tabor A, Hamilton S, Zhang W.

University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

To generate cDNA arrays in our core laboratory, we amplified about 2300 PCR
products from a human, sequence-verified cDNA clone library. As a
quality-control step, we sequenced the PCR products immediately before printing.
The sequence information was used to search the GenBank database to confirm the
identities. Although these clones were previously sequence verified by the
company, we found that only 79% of the clones matched the original database
after handling. Our experience strongly indicates the necessity to sequence
verify the clones at the final stage before printing on microarray slides and to
modify the gene list accordingly.

Publication Types:
    Technical Report

PMID: 11464521 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR106: Exp Mol Med. 2001 Jun 30;33(2):83-8. 

A novel method using edge detection for signal extraction from cDNA microarray
image analysis.

Kim JH, Kim HY, Lee YS.

Institute of Mental Health, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.
jhkim1@hanyang.ac.kr

Gene expression analyses by probes of hybridization from mRNA to cDNA targets
arrayed on membranes or activated glass surfaces have revolutionized the way of
profiling mega level gene expression. The main remaining problems however are
sensitivity of detection, reproducibility and data processing. During processing
of microarray images, especially irregularities of spot position and shape could
generate significant errors: small regions of signal spots can be mis-included
into background area and vice versa. Here we report a novel method to eliminate
such obstacles by sensing their edges. Application of edge detection technology
on separating spots from the background decreases the probability of the errors
and gives more accurate information about the states of spots such as the pixel
number, degree of fragmentation, width and height of spot, and circumference of
spot. Such information can be used for the quality control of cDNA microarray
experiments and filtering of low quality spots. We analyzed the cDNA microarray
image that contains 10,368 genes using edge detection and compared the result
with that of conventional method which draws circle around the spot.

PMID: 11460886 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR107: Onkologie. 2001 Feb;24 Suppl 1:24-34. 

[Clinical trials: prerequisite of evidence-based oncology: reality, perspectives
and a new tool recruited--the Internet]

[Article in German]

Mross K, Marz W.

Klinik fur Tumorbiologie an der Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat, Freiburg i.Br.
mross@tumorbio.uni-freiburg.de

Scientifically sound clinical research is an undispensable prerequisite to
establish innovative therapeutic principles, to support applications for
marketing authorization of proprietary new drugs, to advance therapeutic results
in cancer therapy, and the only route towards an evidence-based clinical
oncology at the advent of the 21st century. Treatment of cancer patients based
on scientific evidence derived from clinical studies outperforms compassionate
individual therapeutic decisions with a lack of evidence, whenever such evidence
is available or whenever a clinical trial is addressing the clinical situation
that must be addressed for an individual patient. A stable trend towards
improved survival of cancer patients was first observed in 1999. The advent of
new technologies of drug design, the integration of pharmacology, genomics and
DNA microarray chip technologies will produce a myriad of new anticancer drugs
with promising potential for cancer therapy that need to be tested in the
clinical setting without delay. To match that challenge, clinical oncology must
streamline the laborious process of conducting clinical trials. The process of
planning, multicenter coordinating, recruiting, treatment, analyzing, and
reporting of clinical trial results must be further optimized. The best possible
quality control of all steps of that process is a prerequisite to motivate
patients to participate in clinical trials of cancer therapy - always one of the
most promising treatment options for patients seeking the best possible cancer
care. At the same time as the internet goes mainstream and cancer care
information is ubiquitously laymanized and dispersed via cancer cybermedicine,
clinical researchers may employ the internet to exchange information, facilitate
conduction of clinical trials, and facilitate recruitment to clinical studies
via web-based trial registries. This will be more than an incremental step
forward to deliver the best possible clinical care towards the ultimate goal: to
deliver evidence-based medicine en route to a cure for more cancer patients than
ever. Copyright 2001 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg

PMID: 11441309 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR108: Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 15;29(12):2549-57. 

Issues in cDNA microarray analysis: quality filtering, channel normalization,
models of variations and assessment of gene effects.

Tseng GC, Oh MK, Rohlin L, Liao JC, Wong WH.

Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, 655 Huntington
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We consider the problem of comparing the gene expression levels of cells grown
under two different conditions using cDNA microarray data. We use a quality
index, computed from duplicate spots on the same slide, to filter out outlying
spots, poor quality genes and problematical slides. We also perform calibration
experiments to show that normalization between fluorescent labels is needed and
that the normalization is slide dependent and non-linear. A rank invariant
method is suggested to select non-differentially expressed genes and to
construct normalization curves in comparative experiments. After normalization
the residuals from the calibration data are used to provide prior information on
variance components in the analysis of comparative experiments. Based on a
hierarchical model that incorporates several levels of variations, a method for
assessing the significance of gene effects in comparative experiments is
presented. The analysis is demonstrated via two groups of experiments with 125
and 4129 genes, respectively, in Escherichia coli grown in glucose and acetate.

PMID: 11410663 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR109: Rinsho Byori. 2001 Feb;49(2):139-49. 

[The present status and future prospect of the molecular diagnostic tests]

[Article in Japanese]

Miyachi H.

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara
259-1193.

Assays for DNA or RNA sequences to diagnose infectious, neoplastic and genetic
diseases have been widely used through recent progress in the molecular biology
and biotechnology, and are now essential in care of patients under the advanced
medicine through earlier and more accurate diagnosis. Automated systems have
been developed for amplification and detection of nucleic acid sequence for
infectious agents, using various nucleic acid amplification technology such as
PCR. A fully automated PCR system and automated extraction of specific sequence
for infectious agents such as hepatitis C virus RNA has been developed. These
automated systems have provided improvement of not only assay efficiency but
also quality control of the tests and have contributed to the standardization of
them. Importance of development of systems for quality assessment and laboratory
accreditation has been emphasized, particularly in those that still have been
performed with manual methods. Based on the information on the genome sequence
as the outcome of the human genome project, functions of genes and proteins have
been studied by post-genomics such as expression profiling using DNA microarray,
proteomics, single nucleotide polymorphisms analysis, coupled with
bioinformatics. Along with advances in pharmacogenomics, these studies have
raised the prospect of the development of tests for individualized medicine
based on genetic information such as those predicting individual susceptibility
to diseases for prevention and responsiveness to drugs for choice of treatment.
For practice of such medicine, each genetic information and tests for it must be
carefully evaluated and determined whether it is appropriate for cost-effective
medicine through contributions to efficient process of decision-makings on
patient care for prevention or avoidance of diseases and thus to cost savings.

Publication Types:
    Review

PMID: 11307306 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR110: Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Apr 15;29(8):E41-1. 

An evaluation of the performance of cDNA microarrays for detecting changes in
global mRNA expression.

Yue H, Eastman PS, Wang BB, Minor J, Doctolero MH, Nuttall RL, Stack R, Becker
JW, Montgomery JR, Vainer M, Johnston R.

Advanced Research Group, Incyte Genomics, 6519 Dumbarton Circle, Fremont, CA
94555, USA.

The cDNA microarray is one technological approach that has the potential to
accurately measure changes in global mRNA expression levels. We report an
assessment of an optimized cDNA microarray platform to generate accurate,
precise and reliable data consistent with the objective of using microarrays as
an acquisition platform to populate gene expression databases. The study design
consisted of two independent evaluations with 70 arrays from two different
manufactured lots and used three human tissue sources as samples: placenta,
brain and heart. Overall signal response was linear over three orders of
magnitude and the sensitivity for any element was estimated to be 2 pg mRNA. The
calculated coefficient of variation for differential expression for all
non-differentiated elements was 12-14% across the entire signal range and did
not vary with array batch or tissue source. The minimum detectable fold change
for differential expression was 1.4. Accuracy, in terms of bias (observed minus
expected differential expression ratio), was less than 1 part in 10 000 for all
non-differentiated elements. The results presented in this report demonstrate
the reproducible performance of the cDNA microarray technology platform and the
methods provide a useful framework for evaluating other technologies that
monitor changes in global mRNA expression.

Publication Types:
    Evaluation Studies

PMID: 11292855 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR111: Pac Symp Biocomput. 2001;:348-59. 

Quality control in manufacturing oligo arrays: a combinatorial design approach.

Sengupta R, Tompa M.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Box
352350, Seattle, WA 98195-2350, USA. rimli@cs.washington.edu

The advent of the DNA microarray technology has brought with it the exciting
possibility of simultaneously observing the expression levels of all genes in an
organism. One such microarray technology, called "oligo arrays", manufactures
short single strands of DNA (called probes) onto a glass surface using
photolithography. An altered or missed step in such a manufacturing protocol can
adversely affect all probes using this failed step, and is in general impossible
to disentangle from experimental variation when using such a defective array.
The idea of designing special quality control probes to detect a failed step was
first formulated by Hubbell and Pevzner. We consider an alternative formulation
of this problem and use a combinatorial design approach to solve it. Our results
improve over prior work in guaranteeing coverage of all protocol steps and in
being able to tolerate a greater number of unreliable probe intensities.

PMID: 11262954 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR112: Pharmacogenomics. 2000 Aug;1(3):289-307. 

Applications of biochip and microarray systems in pharmacogenomics.

Jain KK.

Jain PharmaBiotech, Basel, Switzerland. jain@pharmabiotech.ch

A DNA microarray system is usually comprised of DNA probes formatted on a
microscale on a glass surface (chip), plus the instruments needed to handle
samples (automated robotics), to read the reporter molecules (scanners) and
analyse the data (bioinformatic tools). Biochips are formed by in situ (on chip)
synthesis of oligonucleotides or peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) or spotting of DNA
fragments. Hybridisation of RNA- or DNA-derived samples on chips allows the
monitoring of expression of mRNAs or the occurrence of polymorphisms in genomic
DNA. Basic types of DNA chips are the sequencing chip, the expression chip and
chips for comparative genomic hybridisation. Advanced technologies used in
automated microarray production are photolithography, mechanical microspotting
and ink jets. Bioelectronic microchips contain numerous electronically active
microelectrodes with specific DNA capture probes linked to the electrodes
through molecular wires. Several biosensors have been used in combination with
biochips. PNA biosensors commonly rely on the immobilisation of a
single-stranded DNA sequence (the 'probe') onto a transducer surface for
hybridisation with the complementary ('target') strand to give a suitable
electrical signal. Other sensors are cell-based immunobiosensors with engineered
molecular recognition, integrated biosensors based on phototransistor integrated
circuits and sensors based on surface plasmon resonance. Microarray technologies
offer enormous savings in time and labour as compared to standard gel-based
microsatellite methods. Reading of the information and its management by
bioinformatics is necessary because of the enormous amount of data generated by
the various technologies using microarrays. Standardised procedures are
essential for compatible data production, quality control and analysis.
Expression monitoring is the most biologically informative application of this
technology at present. Microarray technology has important applications in
pharmacogenomics: drug discovery and development, drug safety and molecular
diagnostics. DNA chips will facilitate the integration of diagnosis and
therapeutics, as well as the introduction of personalised medicines.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11256580 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR113: Adv Anat Pathol. 2001 Jan;8(1):14-20. 

Tissue microarrays: what will they bring to molecular and anatomic pathology?

Moch H, Kononen T, Kallioniemi OP, Sauter G.

Institute for Pathology, University Basel, Switzerland. hmoch@uhbs.ch

The analysis of a large number of tumor tissues with conventional techniques of
molecular pathology is tedious and slow. The authors recently developed the
tissue microarray technology that makes it possible to sample up to 1,000 tumors
on one glass slide, which then can be analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, RNA in situ hybridization, or immunohistochemistry. The tissue
microarray technology has the potential to significantly accelerate molecular
studies that seek associations between molecular changes and clinicopathologic
features of the cancer. Examples of potential applications for tissue
microarrays include testing and optimization of probes and antibodies, the
organization of large tissue repositories, and the facilitation of multicenter
studies. Further, tissue microarrays can be used for educational purposes as
well as to improve quality control and standardization of staining methods and
interpretation. Tissue microarrays have become one of the most promising tools
for the molecular and anatomic pathologist and will have many applications in
cancer research, as well as in other fields of pathology. This review article
gives an overview of current applications of tissue microarrays as well as
possible future development of the technology.

PMID: 11152090 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR114: Biotechniques. 2000 Jul;29(1):78-81. 

Analysis of DNA microarrays by non-destructive fluorescent staining using SYBR
green II.

Battaglia C, Salani G, Consolandi C, Bernardi LR, De Bellis G.

Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate
Segrate, Italy.

A simple, non-destructive procedure is described to determine the quality of DNA
arrays before they are used. It consists of a preliminary staining step of the
DNA microarray by using SYBR green II, a fluorophore with specific affinity for
ssDNA, followed by a laser scan analysis. The surface quality, integrity and
homogeneity of each DNA spot of the array can thus be assessed. After this
preliminary control, which may avoid further analytical steps that lead to the
waste of precious biological samples, a fully reversible staining procedure is
performed that produces an array ready for subsequent use.

Publication Types:
    Technical Report

PMID: 10907080 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR115: Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2000;14(4):243-9. 

Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry of synthetic oligonucleotides using
2-propanol and spermidine

De Bellis G, Salani G, Battaglia C, Pietta P, Rosti E, Mauri P.

Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
L.I.T.A., Via Fratelli Cervi 93, 20090 Segrate, Italy.

Oligonucleotides have become widely used tools in molecular biology and
molecular diagnostics. Their parallel synthesis in large numbers and the
increasing interest in microarray technology has raised the requirement for fast
and informative analytical tools for their quality control. A direct injection
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) technique based on the use of
aqueous 2-propanol as running eluent, and spermidine (or triethylamine) as DNA
modifiers, has been applied to analyze a large set of samples (about 200
synthetic oligonucleotides) ranging from 5 to 15 kDa (17-51mers) with good
results in terms of sensitivity, suppression of sodium adduct formation, and
speed of analysis. Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 0010669883 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


