NR1: Mol Cell Biochem. 2003 Dec;254(1-2):21-36. 

Gene expression profile of butyrate-inhibited vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation.

Ranganna K, Yousefipour Z, Yatsu FM, Milton SG, Hayes BE.

College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Texas Southern University, Houston, TX
77004, USA. kranganna@hotmail.com

Excessive proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a critical
element in the development of several vascular pathologies, particularly in
atherosclerosis and in restenosis due to angioplasty. We have shown that
butyrate, a powerful antiproliferative agent, a strong promoter of cell
differentiation and an inducer of apoptosis inhibits VSMC proliferation at
physiological concentrations with no cytotoxicity. In the present study, we have
used cDNA array technology to unravel the molecular basis of the
antiproliferative effect of butyrate on VSMCs. To assess the involvement of gene
expression in butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation, proliferating VSMCs were
exposed to 5 mmol/l butyrate 1 through 5 days after plating. Expression profiles
of 1.176 genes representing different functional classes in untreated control
and butyrate treated VSMCs were compared. A total of 111 genes exhibiting
moderate (2.0-5.0 fold) to strong (> 5.0 fold) differential expression were
identified. Analysis of these genes indicates that butyrate treatment mainly
alters the expression of four different functional classes of genes, which
include: 43 genes implicated in cell growth and differentiation, 13 genes
related to stress response, 11 genes associated with vascular function and 8
genes normally present in neuronal cells. Examination of differentially
expressed cell growth and differentiation related genes indicate that
butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation appears to involve down-regulation of
genes that encode several positive regulators of cell growth and up-regulation
of some negative regulators of growth or differentiation inducers. Some of the
down-regulated genes include proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA),
retinoblastoma susceptibility related protein p130 (pRb), cell division control
protein 2 homolog (cdc2), cyclin B1, cell division control protein 20 homolog
(p55cdc), high mobility group (HMG) 1 and 2 and several others. Whereas the
up-regulated genes include cyclin D1, p21WAF1, p141NK4B/p15INK5B, Clusterin,
inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (ID1) and others. On the other hand,
butyrate-responsive stress-related genes include some of the members of heat
shock protein (HSP), glutathione-s-transferase (GST), glutathione peroxidase
(GSH-PXs) and cytochrome P450 (CYP) families. Additionally, several genes
related to vascular and neuronal function are also responsive to butyrate
treatment. Although involvement of genes that encode stress response, vascular
and neuronal functional proteins in cell proliferation is not clear, cDNA
expression array data appear to suggest that they may play a role in the
regulation of cell proliferation. However, cDNA expression profiles indicate
that butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation involves combined action of a
proportionally large number of both positive and negative regulators of growth,
which ultimately causes growth arrest of VSMCs. Furthermore, these
butyrate-induced differential gene expression changes are not only consistent
with the antiproliferative effect of butyrate but are also in agreement with the
roles that these gene products play in cell proliferation.

PMID: 14674679 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR2: Cell Res. 2003 Oct;13(5):351-9. 

The in vitro reconstitution of nucleosome and its binding patterns with HMG1/2
and HMG14/17 proteins.

Zhang SB, Huang J, Zhao H, Zhang Y, Hou CH, Cheng XD, Jiang C, Li MQ, Hu J, Qian
RL.

Group of Globin Gene Expression and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
200031, China.

Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), the dynamic process of the in vitro
nucleosome reconstitution followed by slow dilution from high salt to low salt
was visualized. Data showed that the histone octamers were dissociated from DNA
at 1M NaCl. When the salt concentration was slowly reduced to 650 mM and 300 mM,
the core histones bound to the naked DNA gradually. Once the salt concentration
was reduced to 50 mM the classic "beads-on-a-string" structure was clearly
visualized. Furthermore, using the technique of the in vitro reconstitution of
nucleosome, the mono- and di- nucleosomes were assembled in vitro with both
HS2core (-10681 to -10970 bp) and NCR2 (-372 to -194 bp) DNA sequences in the 5
flanking sequence of human b-globin gene. Data revealed that HMG 1/2 and
HMG14/17 proteins binding to both DNA sequences are changeable following the
assembly and disassembly of nucleosomes. We suggest that the changeable binding
patterns of HMG 14/17 and HMG1/2 proteins with these regulatory elements may be
critical in the process of nucleosome assembly, recruitment of
chromatin-modifying activities, and the regulation of human b-globin gene
expression.

PMID: 14672558 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR3: Med Mycol. 2003 Oct;41(5):417-25. 

Antifungal activity of fluconazole in combination with lovastatin and their
effects on gene expression in the ergosterol and prenylation pathways in Candida
albicans.

Song JL, Lyons CN, Holleman S, Oliver BG, White TC.

Department of Pathobiology, School of Public Health and Community Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The sterol pathway in Candida albicans is the target for several classes of
antifungal drugs. Intermediates in the sterol pathway are involved in ergosterol
synthesis, prenylation and dolichol synthesis. This study examines gene
expression of the sterol pathway in response to lovastatin, an inhibitor of
HMG-CoA reductase (Hmg1p), and fluconazole, an inhibitor of 14 alpha-lanosterol
demethylase (Erg11p). Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) studies indicated
that lovastatin acts synergistically with fluconazole in vitro.
Semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
results indicated that genes in the early part of the sterol pathway, such as
HMG1 and ERG20, did not alter expression in the presence of both lovastatin and
fluconazole, whereas genes in the later part of the sterol pathway, such as ERG9
and ERG11, had increased expression in response to these drugs in
mid-logarithmic growth. Genes involved in prenylation, such as RAM1 and RAM2,
also respond to these drugs in mid-logarithmic growth, although another
prenylation gene, CDC43, was not affected. After 24 h of growth, the relative
expression of ERG20, ERG9, and ERG11 remained unchanged or increased in the
presence of both drugs, while all other genes decreased in expression under all
drug treatments.

PMID: 14653518 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR4: Endocrinology. 2004 Mar;145(3):1130-6. Epub 2003 Nov 20. 

An octamer motif is required for activation of the inducible nitric oxide
synthase promoter in pancreatic beta-cells.

Darville MI, Terryn S, Eizirik DL.

Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Universite libre de Bruxelles, B-1070
Brussels, Belgium. mdarvill@ulb.ac.be

Nitric oxide, generated by the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
is a potential mediator of cytokine-induced beta-cell dysfunction in type 1
diabetes mellitus. We have previously shown that cytokine-induced iNOS
expression is cycloheximide (CHX) sensitive and requires nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappa B) activation. In the present study, we show that an octamer motif
located 20 bp downstream of the proximal NF-kappa B binding site in the rat iNOS
promoter is critical for IL-1 beta and interferon-gamma induction of promoter
activity in rat primary beta-cells and insulin-producing RINm5F cells. In gel
shift assays, the octamer motif bound constitutively the transcription factor
Oct1. Neither Oct1 nor NF-kappa B binding activities were blocked by CHX,
suggesting that other factor(s) synthesized in response to IL-1 beta contribute
to iNOS promoter induction. The high mobility group (HMG)-I(Y) protein also
bound the proximal iNOS promoter region. HMG-I(Y) binding was decreased in cells
treated with CHX and HMG-I(Y) silencing by RNA interference reduced IL-1
beta-induced iNOS promoter activity. These results suggest that Oct1, NF-kappa
B, and HMG-I(Y) cooperate for transactivation of the iNOS promoter in pancreatic
beta-cells.

PMID: 14630716 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR5: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Nov 15;31(22):6450-60. 

DNA-protein cross-linking by trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)]. A concept for
activation of the trans geometry in platinum antitumor complexes.

Novakova O, Kasparkova J, Malina J, Natile G, Brabec V.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, CZ-61265
Brno.

The structure-pharmacological activity relationships generally accepted for
antitumor platinum compounds stressed the necessity for the
cis-[PtX(2)(amine)(2)] structure while the trans-[PtX(2)(amine)(2)] structure
was considered inactive. However, more recently, several trans-platinum
complexes have been identified which are potently toxic, antitumor-active and
demonstrate activity distinct from that of conventional cisplatin
(cis-[PtCl(2)(NH(3))(2)]). We have shown in the previous report that the
replacement of ammine ligands by iminoether in transplatin
(trans-[PtCl(2)(NH(3))(2)]) results in a marked enhancement of its cytotoxicity
so that it is more cytotoxic than its cis congener and exhibits significant
antitumor activity, including activity in cisplatin-resistant tumor cells. In
addition, we have also shown previously that this new trans compound
(trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)]) forms mainly monofunctional adducts at
guanine residues on DNA, which is generally accepted to be the cellular target
of platinum drugs. In order to shed light on the mechanism underlying the
antitumor activity of trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] we examined
oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes containing a single, site-specific,
monofunctional adduct of this transplatin analog by the methods of molecular
biophysics. The results indicate that major monofunctional adducts of
trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] locally distort DNA, bend the DNA axis by 21
degrees toward the minor groove, are not recognized by HMGB1 proteins and are
readily removed from DNA by nucleotide excision repair (NER). In addition, the
monofunctional adducts of trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] readily cross-link
proteins, which markedly enhances the efficiency of this adduct to terminate DNA
polymerization by DNA polymerases in vitro and to inhibit removal of this adduct
from DNA by NER. It is suggested that DNA-protein ternary cross-links produced
by trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] could persist considerably longer than the
non-cross-linked monofunctional adducts, which would potentiate toxicity of this
antitumor platinum compound toward tumor cells sensitive to this drug. Thus,
trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] represents a quite new class of platinum
antitumor drugs in which activation of trans geometry is associated with an
increased efficiency to form DNA-protein ternary cross-links thereby acting by a
different mechanism from 'classical' cisplatin and its analogs.

PMID: 14602903 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR6: Oncol Rep. 2003 Nov-Dec;10(6):1863-8. 

Amphoterin induction in prostatic stromal cells by androgen deprivation is
associated with metastatic prostate cancer.

Kuniyasu H, Chihara Y, Kondo H, Ohmori H, Ukai R.

Department of Oncological Pathology, Cancer Center, Nara Medical University,
Nara 734-8521, Japan. cooninh@zb4.so-net.ne.jp

Amphoterin, the major product of the high mobility group-1 gene, is a ligand
associated with cancer invasion and metastasis through activation of the
receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). Expression of amphoterin
and RAGE was examined in prostatectomy specimens from 40 patients with pT3
prostate cancer (18 non-metastatic and 22 metastatic) preoperatively treated
with lutenizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist. Amphoterin expression
was detected in tumor cells of 6 (27%) metastatic and 0 non-metastatic cases
(p<0.0001). Amphoterin was also detected in prostatic stromal cells of 14 (63%)
metastatic cases and 2 (11%) non-metastatic cases (p=0.0010). RAGE production
was detected in cancer cells of 16 (73%) metastatic and 6 (33%) non-metastatic
cases (p=0.0244). A total of 2 (22%) non-metastatic and 16 (73%) metastatic
cases showed co-expression of amphoterin and RAGE in tumor cells or in tumor
cells and stromal cells (p=0.0001). The in vitro invasive capacity of PC-3, a
prostatic cancer cell line that co-expressed amphoterin and RAGE, was suppressed
by treatment with amphoterin antisense S-oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN). Primary
cultured human prostatic stromal cells secreted no amphoterin; however,
amphoterin secretion was induced by androgen deprivation. The conditioned medium
of human prostatic stromal cells deprived of androgen recovered the in vitro
invasive capacity of PC-3 cells suppressed by amphoterin antisense S-ODN. These
results suggest that androgen deprivation provides a paracrine interaction
between cancer and stromal cells through the RAGE-amphoterin system in advanced
prostate cancer.

PMID: 14534709 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR7: Biol Chem. 2003 Jul;384(7):1019-27. 

Interaction of maize chromatin-associated HMG proteins with mononucleosomes:
role of core and linker histones.

Lichota J, Grasser KD.

Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

Two groups of plant chromatin-associated high mobility group (HMG) proteins,
namely the HMGA family, typically containing four A/T-hook DNA-binding motifs,
and the HMGB family, containing a single HMG-box DNA-binding domain, have been
identified. We have examined the interaction of recombinant maize HMGA and five
different HMGB proteins with mononucleosomes (containing approx. 165 bp of DNA)
purified from micrococcal nuclease-digested maize chromatin. The HMGB proteins
interacted with the nucleosomes independent of the presence of the linker
histone H1, while the binding of HMGA in the presence of H1 differed from that
observed in the absence of H1. HMGA and the HMGB proteins bound H1-containing
nucleosome particles with similar affinity. The plant HMG proteins could also
bind nucleosomes that were briefly treated with trypsin (removing the N-terminal
domains of the core histones), suggesting that the histone N-termini are
dispensable for HMG protein binding. In the presence of untreated nucleosomes
and trypsinised nucleosomes, HMGB1 could be chemically crosslinked with a core
histone, which indicates that the trypsin-resistant part of the histones within
the nucleosome is the main interaction partner of HMGB1 rather than the histone
N-termini. In conclusion, these results indicate that specific nucleosome
binding of the plant HMGB proteins requires simultaneous DNA and histone
contacts.

PMID: 12956418 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR8: Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Aug;14(8):3414-26. Epub 2003 Apr 17. 

Association of chromatin proteins high mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and HMGB2
with mitotic chromosomes.

Pallier C, Scaffidi P, Chopineau-Proust S, Agresti A, Nordmann P, Bianchi ME,
Marechal V.

Unite de Virologie, Service de Bacteriologie-Virologie, Hopital de Bicetre,
Assistance Publique/Hopitaux de Paris, 94275 Le Kremlin Bicetre, France.

High mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and 2 are two abundant nonhistone nuclear
proteins that have been found in association with chromatin. Previous studies
based on immunofluorescence analysis indicated that HMGB1 dissociates from
chromosomes during mitosis. In the present work, HMGB1 and 2 subcellular
localization was reinvestigated in living cells by using enhanced green
fluorescent protein- and Discosome sp. red fluorescent protein-tagged proteins.
Contrary to previous reports, HMGB1 and 2 were shown to be present under two
forms in mitotic cells, i.e., free and associated with the condensed chromatin,
which rapidly exchange. A detailed analysis of HMGB2 interaction with mitotic
chromosomes indicated that two sites encompassing HMG-box A and B are
responsible for binding. Importantly, this interaction was rapidly inactivated
when cells were permeabilized or exposed to chemical fixatives that are widely
used in immunodetection techniques. A comparable behavior was also observed for
two proteins of the HMG-nucleosome binding (HMGN) group, namely, HMGN1 and
HMGN2.

PMID: 12925773 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR9: Immunogenetics. 2003 Sep;55(6):370-8. Epub 2003 Aug 13. 

Molecular genetic characterization of the distal NKC recombination hotspot and
putative murine CMV resistance control locus.

Scalzo AA, Wheat R, Dubbelde C, Stone L, Clark P, Du Y, Dong N, Stoll J,
Yokoyama WM, Brown MG.

Department of Microbiology, University of Western Australia, 6907 Nedlands,
Western Australia, Australia.

The NK gene complex (NKC) controls murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) immunity
through Cmv1-dependent natural killer (NK) cell responses. Ly49H expression
correlates with Cmv1 phenotypes in different inbred strains, is required for
MCMV resistance in C57BL/6 (B6) mice, and its interaction with the MCMV encoded
m157 protein leads to NK cell-mediated destruction of virus-infected cells.
However, genetic mapping studies have previously indicated that Cmv1 should
reside in the D6Wum9-16 NKC interval, distal to Ly49h. Since these data
suggested that multiple NKC-linked loci could regulate viral immunity, a
putative MCMV resistance control ( Mrc) locus was pinpointed to within the
D6Wum9-16 interval on a NKC-aligned bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC).
Sequence analysis of BAC 151 revealed several novel G-protein coupled receptor
genes, an HMG-1 remnant and many additional polymorphic microsatellites that
were useful in determining the minimal genetic interval for the Mrc locus.
Moreover, comparison of B6, BALB/c, A/J and recombinant Mrc alleles restricted
the genetic interval to approximately 470 bp and showed that it was also a
hotspot for recombination. MCMV challenge of novel NKC recombinant mice
demonstrated that Mrc(B6) was not required for MCMV resistance nor could it
directly complement the Ly49(BALB) haplotype to rescue MCMV susceptibility.
Taken together, these data show that while Mrc apparently guides recombination,
Ly49H expression is sufficient for MCMV resistance in B6 mice. A direct role for
Mrc(B6) in virus resistance is excluded in the novel mice.

PMID: 12920489 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR10: Gene. 2003 Jul 17;312:103-9. 

Cloning and characterization of rice HMGB1 gene.

Wu Q, Zhang W, Pwee KH, Kumar PP.

Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 10 Science
Drive 4, Singapore 117543, Singapore.

We isolated a 918 bp long full-length rice HMGB1 cDNA, which has an open reading
frame of 471 bp encoding 157 amino acids, with a central domain of high sequence
similarity to the HMG-box domain of other plant HMGB1 proteins. RNA gel blot
analysis indicated that rice HMGB1 gene is constitutively expressed in various
tissues and organs. Southern hybridization and sequence analyses suggested that
a single copy of the HMGB1 gene composed of seven exons and six introns exists
in rice. We have also cloned a 1755 bp long 5' flanking region of the rice HMGB1
gene, which can be regarded as its promoter. 5' deletion analysis of this
promoter indicated that positive cis-elements residing between -1400 and -1115
are important to enhance quantitative expression, whereas negative cis-elements
between -1755 and -1400 and between -1115 and -351 inhibit expression.

PMID: 12909345 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR11: Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2003 Apr;41(4):303-6. 

[The potential role of high mobility group-1 protein in the pathogenesis of
sepsis-induced multiple organ dysfunction syndrome in rats]

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LT, Yao YM, Lu JQ, Dong N, Yu Y, Yan XJ, Fang WH, Sheng ZY.

Trauma Research Center, 304th Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Beijing
100037, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential role of high mobility group-1 protein
(HMG-1) in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome in rats. METHODS: Using a sepsis model by cecal ligation and puncture
(CLP), 80 male Wistar rats were randomly divided into four groups: normal
control (n = 10), sham operation (n = 10), CLP (subdivided into 2, 6, 12, 24,
48, 72 h post-CLP, n = 60), and sodium butyrate treatment (subdivided into 12,
24 h post-CLP, n = 20). At serial time points in each group, animals were
sacrificed, and blood as well as tissue samples from the liver, lung, kidney and
small intestine were harvested to measure organ function parameters and HMG-1
mRNA expression by the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
taking GAPDH as an internal standard. Also, additional experiments were
performed to observe the effect of treatment with sodium butyrate on survival
rate in septic rats (n = 57). RESULTS: HMG-1 mRNA levels significantly increased
in various tissues during 6 - 72 h after CLP (P < 0.05 or 0.01), and were
markedly inhibited by sodium butyrate at 12 h and 24 h (P < 0.05 or 0.01). Early
treatment with sodium butyrate also could markedly reduce serum alanine
aminotransferase, creatinine levels at 12 h post-CLP and pulmonary
myeloperoxidase activities at 24 h. Furthermore, treatment with sodium butyrate
could significantly improve the 1- to 6-day survival rates in animals subjected
to CLP (P < 0.05 or 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: HMG-1 might play an important role in
the development of excessive inflammatory response and subsequent multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome.

PMID: 12882679 [PubMed - in process]



NR12: Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jun 15;31(12):3236-47. 

The acidic C-terminal domain and A-box of HMGB-1 regulates p53-mediated
transcription.

Banerjee S, Kundu TK.

Transcription and Disease Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,
Jawaharlal Nehru Center for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore
560064, India.

p53 function is modulated by several covalent and non-covalent modifiers. The
architectural DNA- binding protein, High Mobility Group protein B-1 is a unique
activator of p53. HMGB-1 protein is structured into two HMG-box domains, namely
A-box and B-box, connected to a long highly acidic C-terminal domain. Here we
report that both the C-terminal domain and A-box of HMGB-1 are critical for
stimulation of p53-mediated DNA binding to its cognate site. Though deletion of
these domains showed minimal effect in activation of p53-mediated transcription
from the DNA template as compared to full-length HMGB-1, truncation of both the
domains indeed showed significant reduction of transcriptional activation from
the chromatin template as observed in DNA binding. Using transient transfection
assays we showed that the C-terminal acidic domain and A-box of HMGB-1 are
critical for the enhancement of the p53-mediated transactivation in vivo.
Furthermore, the C-terminal domain and A-box deleted HMGB-1 could not activate
p53-dependent apoptosis above the basal level. In conclusion, these results
elucidate the role of acidic C-terminal domain and A-box of HMGB-1 in
p53-mediated transcriptional activation and its further downstream effect.

PMID: 12799451 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR13: J Biochem (Tokyo). 2003 Apr;133(4):533-9. 

Drosophila DSP1 and rat HMGB1 have equivalent DNA binding properties and share a
similar secondary fold.

Janke C, Martin D, Giraud-Panis MJ, Decoville M, Locker D.

Centre de Biophysique Moleculaire, CNRS, conventionne avec l'Universite
d'Orleans, rue Charles Sadron, 45071 Orleans cedex 2, France.

The protein DSP1 belongs to the group of HMG-box proteins, which share the
common structural feature of the HMG-box. This approximately 80 amino acid long
motif binds DNA via the minor groove. DSP1 was discovered as a transcriptional
co-repressor of Dorsal in Drosophila melanogaster and then was shown to
participate to the remodeling of chromatin. By means of sequence alignment and
gene organization, DSP1 was classified as the fly homologue of the vertebrate
proteins HMGB1/2. DSP1 contains two HMG boxes flanked by two glutamine-rich
domains at the N-terminus. In addition, the HMG domain of DSP1 displays two
differences in its primary sequence as compared to the vertebrate HMGB1: a
shorter acidic tail and a linker between the two boxes longer by 6 amino acids.
By comparing several functional parameters of DSP1 with those of HMGB1, the
present study establishes the functional equivalence of both proteins in terms
of DNA recognition. The major structural difference between the two proteins,
the glutamine-rich N-terminal tail of DSP1, which does not exist in HMGB1, did
not interfere with any of the studied DNA-binding properties of the proteins.

PMID: 12761302 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR14: Genome Res. 2003 May;13(5):800-12. 

Retroposed copies of the HMG genes: a window to genome dynamics.

Strichman-Almashanu LZ, Bustin M, Landsman D.

Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20894, USA.

Retroposed copies (RPCs) of genes are functional (intronless paralogs) or
nonfunctional (processed pseudogenes) copies derived from mRNA through a process
of retrotransposition. Previous studies found that gene families involved in
mRNA translation or nuclear function were more likely to have large numbers of
RPCs. Here we characterize RPCs of the few families coding for the abundant
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins in humans. Using an algorithm we developed,
we identified and studied 219 HMG RPCs. For slightly more than 10% of these
RPCs, we found evidence indicating expression. Furthermore, eight of these are
potentially new members of the HMG families of proteins. For three RPCs, the
evidence indicated expression as part of other transcripts; in all of these, we
found the presence of alternative splicing or multiple polyadenylation signals.
RPC distribution among the HMGs was not even, with 33-65 each for HMGB1, HMGB3,
HMGN1, and HMGN2, and 0-6 each for HMGA1, HMGA2, HMGB2, and HMGN3. Analysis of
the sequences flanking the RPCs revealed that the junction between the target
site duplications and the 5'-flanking sequences exhibited the same TT/AAAA
consensus found for the L1 endonuclease, supporting an L1-mediated
retrotransposition mechanism. Finally, because our algorithm included aligning
RPC flanking sequences with the corresponding HMG genomic sequence, we were able
to identify transcribed regions of HMG genes that were not part of the published
mRNA sequences.

PMID: 12727900 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR15: Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 1;42(12):3503-8. 

Phosphorylation of maize and Arabidopsis HMGB proteins by protein kinase
CK2alpha.

Stemmer C, Leeming DJ, Franssen L, Grimm R, Grasser KD.

Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

In plants, a variety of chromatin-associated high mobility group (HMG) proteins
belonging to the HMGB family have been identified. We have examined the
phosphorylation of the HMGB proteins from the monocotyledonous plant maize and
the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis by protein kinase CK2alpha. Maize CK2alpha
phosphorylates the maize HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 proteins and the Arabidopsis HMGB1,
HMGB2/3, and HMGB4 proteins. Maize HMGB4 and HMGB5 and Arabidopsis HMGB5 are not
phosphorylated by CK2alpha. Depending on the HMGB protein up to five amino acid
residues are phosphorylated in the course of the phosphorylation reaction. The
HMGB1 proteins from both plants are markedly more slowly phosphorylated by
CK2alpha than the other HMGB substrate proteins, indicating that certain HMGB
proteins are clearly preferred substrates for CK2alpha. The rate of the
phosphorylation reaction appears to be related to the ease of interaction
between CK2alpha and the HMGB proteins, as indicated by chemical cross-linking
experiments. MALDI/TOF mass spectrometry analyses demonstrate that the HMGB1 and
HMGB2/3 proteins occur in various phosphorylation states in immature maize
kernels. Thus, HMGB1 exists as monophosphorylated, double-phosphorylated,
triple-phosphorylated, and tetraphosphorylated protein in kernel tissue, and the
tetraphosphorylated form is the most abundant version. The observed in vivo
phosphorylation states indicate that protein kinase(s) other than CK2alpha
contribute(s) to the modification of the plant HMGB proteins. The fact that the
HMGB proteins are phosphorylated to various extents reveals that the existence
of differentially modified forms increases the number of distinct HMGB protein
variants in plant chromatin that may be adapted to certain functions.

PMID: 12653554 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR16: Biochem Genet. 2003 Feb;41(1-2):39-46. 

High mobility group-like proteins of the insect Plodia interpunctella.

Aleporou-Marinou V, Drosos Y, Ninios Y, Agelopoulou B, Patargias T.

Department of Biology, Division of Genetics and Biotechnology, University of
Athens, Athens, Greece. valepor@biol.uoa.gr

Nuclei from Plodia interpunctella larvae contain four major proteins, which are
extracted by 5% perchloric acid and 0.35 M NaCl. The proteins have been
designated PL1, PL2, PL3, and PL4. The amino acid analyses of these proteins
show that they have high proportions of acidic and basic amino acid residues, a
property characteristic of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins isolated from
vertebrate tissues. Immunological characterication of these proteins clearly
shows that PL1, PL2, and PL4 are more closely related to HMG1 dipteran proteins,
while PL3 is more closely related to HMG1 dipteran proteins. The possible
relatedness of these proteins to HMG proteins is discussed.

PMID: 12645872 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR17: Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(7):2379-94. 

Synthesis of signals for de novo DNA methylation in Neurospora crassa.

Tamaru H, Selker EU.

Department of Biology and Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon,
Eugene, Oregon 97403-1229, USA.

Most 5-methylcytosine in Neurospora crassa occurs in A:T-rich sequences high in
TpA dinucleotides, hallmarks of repeat-induced point mutation. To investigate
how such sequences induce methylation, we developed a sensitive in vivo system.
Tests of various 25- to 100-bp synthetic DNA sequences revealed that both T and
A residues were required on a given strand to induce appreciable methylation.
Segments composed of (TAAA)(n) or (TTAA)(n) were the most potent signals;
25-mers induced robust methylation at the special test site, and a 75-mer
induced methylation elsewhere. G:C base pairs inhibited methylation, and
cytosines 5' of ApT dinucleotides were particularly inhibitory. Weak signals
could be strengthened by extending their lengths. A:T tracts as short as two
were found to cooperate to induce methylation. Distamycin, which, like the
AT-hook DNA binding motif found in proteins such as mammalian HMG-I, binds to
the minor groove of A:T-rich sequences, suppressed DNA methylation and gene
silencing. We also found a correlation between the strength of methylation
signals and their binding to an AT-hook protein (HMG-I) and to activities in a
Neurospora extract. We propose that de novo DNA methylation in Neurospora cells
is triggered by cooperative recognition of the minor groove of multiple short
A:T tracts. Similarities between sequences subjected to repeat-induced point
mutation in Neurospora crassa and A:T-rich repeated sequences in heterochromatin
in other organisms suggest that related mechanisms control silent chromatin in
fungi, plants, and animals.

PMID: 12640122 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR18: J Exp Med. 2003 Mar 3;197(5):669-74. 

Increased susceptibility to LPS-induced endotoxin shock in secretory
leukoprotease inhibitor (SLPI)-deficient mice.

Nakamura A, Mori Y, Hagiwara K, Suzuki T, Sakakibara T, Kikuchi T, Igarashi T,
Ebina M, Abe T, Miyazaki J, Takai T, Nukiwa T.

Department of Respiratory Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Institute of
Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Secretory leukoprotease inhibitor (SLPI) protects tissue against the destructive
action of neutrophil elastase at the site of inflammation. Recent studies on new
functions of SLPI have demonstrated that SLPI may play a larger role in innate
immunity than merely as a protease inhibitor. To clarify the functions of SLPI
in bacterial infections, we generated SLPI-deficient mice (SLPI(-/-) mice) and
analyzed their response to experimental endotoxin shock induced by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). SLPI(-/-) mice showed a higher mortality from
endotoxin shock than did wild type mice. This may be explained in part by our
observation that SLPI(-/-) macro-phages show higher interleukin 6 and
high-mobility group (HMG)-1 production and nuclear factor kappaB activities
after LPS treatment than do SLPI(+/+) macrophages. SLPI also affects B cell
function. SLPI(-/-) B cells show more proliferation and IgM production after LPS
treatment than SLPI(+/+) B cells. Our results suggest that SLPI attenuates
excessive inflammatory responses and thus assures balanced functioning of innate
immunity.

PMID: 12615907 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR19: Biochemistry. 2003 Mar 11;42(9):2664-71. 

Nature of full-length HMGB1 binding to cisplatin-modified DNA.

Jung Y, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.

HMGB1, a highly conserved non-histone DNA-binding protein, interacts with
specific DNA structural motifs such as those encountered at cisplatin damage,
four-way junctions, and supercoils. The interaction of full-length HMGB1,
containing two tandem HMG box domains and a C-terminal acidic tail, with
cisplatin-modified DNA was investigated by hydroxyl radical footprinting and
electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays. The full-length HMGB1 protein binds
to DNA containing a 1,2-intrastrand d(GpG) cross-link mainly through domain A,
as revealed by footprinting, with a dissociation constant K(d) of 120 nM.
Site-directed mutagenesis of intercalating residues in both HMG domains A and B
in full-length HMGB1 further supports the conclusion that only one HMG box
domain is bound to the site of cisplatin damage. Interaction of the C-terminal
tail with the rest of the HMGB1 protein was examined by EDC cross-linking
experiments. The acidic tail mainly interacts with domain B and linker regions
rather than domain A in HMGB1. These results illuminate the respective roles of
the tandem HMG boxes and the C-terminal acidic tail of HMGB1 in binding to DNA
and to the major DNA adducts formed by the anticancer drug cisplatin.

PMID: 12614161 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR20: Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 7;302(2):421-6. 

HMGB1 interacts differentially with members of the Rel family of transcription
factors.

Agresti A, Lupo R, Bianchi ME, Muller S.

DIBIT, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

HMGB1 is an architectural factor that enhances the DNA binding affinity of
several proteins. We have investigated the influence of HMGB1 on DNA binding by
members of the Rel family. HMGB1 enhances DNA binding by p65/p50 and p50/p50,
but reduces binding by p65/p65, c-Rel/c-Rel, p65/c-Rel, and p50/c-Rel. In
pull-down assays, HMGB1 interacts directly with the p50 subunit via its HMG
boxes and this interaction is weakened by the presence of the acidic tail.
Functionally, HMGB1 is required for the NF-kappaB-dependent expression of the
adhesion molecule VCAM-1.

PMID: 12604365 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR21: Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Mar 1;411(1):105-11. 

Rice HMGB1 protein recognizes DNA structures and bends DNA efficiently.

Wu Q, Zhang W, Pwee KH, Kumar PP.

Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of
Singapore, 10 Science Drive 4, 117543, Singapore, Singapore.

We analyzed the DNA-binding and DNA-bending properties of recombinant HMGB1
proteins based on a rice HMGB1 cDNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
demonstrated that rice HMGB1 can bind synthetic four-way junction (4H) DNA and
DNA minicircles efficiently but the binding to 4H can be completed out by HMGA
and histone H1. Conformational changes were detected by circular dichroism
analysis with 4H DNA bound to various concentrations of HMGB1 or its truncated
forms. T4 ligase-mediated circularization assays with short DNA fragments of 123
bp showed that the protein is capable of increasing DNA flexibility. The 123-bp
DNA formed closed circular monomers efficiently in its presence, similar to that
in an earlier study on maize HMG. Additionally, our results show for the first
time that the basic N-terminal domain enhances the affinity of the plant HMGB1
protein for 4H DNA, while the acidic C-terminal domain has the converse effects.

PMID: 12590928 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR22: Curr Pharm Des. 2003;9(1):75-82. 

Cytokine therapeutics for the treatment of sepsis: why has nothing worked?

Remick DG.

Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-6476, USA.
remickd@umich.edu

Several clinical trials have attempted to treat sepsis by blocking certain
aspects of the inflammatory response. Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1
have been specific targets for inhibition but none of the trials have been
successful. These trials were started on the basis of preclinical trials that
suggested these would be effective. There were three lines of evidence to
support the idea of cytokine inhibition. First, patients with increased levels
of cytokines are more likely to die. Second, experimental animal models
demonstrated that blocking the cytokines would improve outcome. Third, injection
of purified, recombinant cytokines would cause both organ injury and death in
experimental animals. Several additional aspects of the inflammatory response
have been discovered since these trials were initiated. Included among these
potential new targets are interleukin 18 and HMG-1. However, before new clinical
trials are started there must be careful consideration of why previous
interventions were not effective. The concept of blocking a single elevated
cytokine may be too simple to deal with the complex problem of sepsis. As
patients move through different phases of the septic response, there may be
intervals when it is appropriate to inhibit multiple cytokines while at other
times it may be appropriate to augment the immune response.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 12570677 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR23: Biochemistry. 2003 Feb 11;42(5):1234-44. 

Erratum in:
    Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 8;42(13):3996.

Recognition of DNA interstrand cross-link of antitumor cisplatin by HMGB1
protein.

Kasparkova J, Delalande O, Stros M, Elizondo-Riojas MA, Vojtiskova M, Kozelka J,
Brabec V.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, CZ-61265 Brno, Czech Republic.

Several proteins that specifically bind to DNA modified by cisplatin, including
those containing HMG-domains, mediate antitumor activity of this drug.
Oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes containing a single, site-specific interstrand
cross-link of cisplatin were probed for recognition by the rat chromosomal
protein HMGB1 and its domains A and B using the electrophoretic mobility-shift
assay. It has been found that the full-length HMGB1 protein and its domain B to
which the lysine-rich region (seven amino acid residues) of the A/B linker is
attached at the N-terminus (the domain HMGB1b7) specifically recognize DNA
interstrand cross-linked by cisplatin. The affinity of these proteins to the
interstrand cross-link of cisplatin is not very different from that to the major
1,2-GG intrastrand cross-link of this drug. In contrast, no recognition of the
interstrand cross-link by the domain B lacking this region or by the domain A
with or without this lysine-rich region attached to its C-terminus is noticed
under conditions when these proteins readily bind to 1,2-GG intrastrand adduct.
A structural model for the complex formed between the interstrand cross-linked
DNA and the domain HMGB1b7 was constructed and refined using molecular mechanics
and molecular dynamics techniques. The calculated accessible areas around the
deoxyribose protons correlate well with the experimental hydroxyl radical
footprint. The model suggests that the only major adaptation necessary for
obtaining excellent surface complementarity is extra DNA unwinding
(approximately 40 degrees ) at the site of the cross-link. The model structure
is consistent with the hypothesis that the enhancement of binding affinity
afforded by the basic lysine-rich A/B linker is a consequence of its tight
binding to the sugar-phosphate backbone of both DNA strands.

PMID: 12564926 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR24: J Endotoxin Res. 2002;8(5):391-398. 

Does high mobility group 1 protein function as a late mediator for LPS- or
TNF-induced shock in galactosamine-sensitized mice? 

Hasunuma R, Maruyama H, Takimoto H, Ryll R, Tanaka S, Kumazawa Y.

Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, Sagamihara,
Japan.

The role of high mobility group-1 protein (HMG-1) in LPS- and TNF-alpha-induced
lethal shock in galactosamine (GalN)-sensitized mice was investigated. No
detectable HMG-1 levels were observed by immunoblotting analysis in plasma from
untreated or GalN-sensitized BALB/c mice 5 h after LPS injection, although
significant levels of HMG-1 were detected in plasma 6 h after the challenge. All
GalN-sensitized BALB/c but not BALB/lps(d) mice succumbed by 6 h after LPS
injection. When GalN-sensitized mice were injected with TNF-alpha, the presence
of HMG-1 was seen at 5.5 h in plasma of BALB/c mice and at 6 h in BALB/lps(d)
mice, although almost all GalN-sensitized BALB/c mice died by 6 h after
challenge. The time-dependent phenomenon correlated with elevated serum
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels and the appearance of apoptotic cells in
livers. Administration of pooled plasma, equivalent to approximately 200 &mgr;g
recombinant murine HMG-1, taken from mice on the verge of near death, did not
result in induction of lethal shock in GalN-sensitized mice. Taken together with
the late appearance of HMG-1 in moribund mice, these data suggest that HMG-1
does not decisively contribute to lethality in the GalN sensitization model.

PMID: 12537698 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]



DR25: J Autoimmun. 2002 Dec;19(4):251-7. 

Autoantibodies to the transcriptional factor SOX13 in primary biliary cirrhosis
compared with other diseases.

Fida S, Myers MA, Whittingham S, Rowley MJ, Ozaki S, Mackay IR.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Wellington
Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

The molecule SOX13 was initially identified as an autoantigen (ICA12) in Type 1
diabetes. SOX13 is a member of the SOX family of transcriptional regulatory
proteins that contain a high mobility group (HMG) motif with structural
similarity to HMG proteins 1 and 2. Antibodies to HMG 1 and 2 occur in
autoimmune diseases of the liver and in ulcerative colitis. We measured the
occurrence and levels of anti-SOX13 by radioimmunoprecipitation in primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and other diseases, and compared frequencies with
anti-HMG measured by ELISA. Anti-SOX13 was detected in 18% of patients with PBC,
13% with autoimmune hepatitis, 18% with Type 1 diabetes, at lower frequencies in
other conditions including the multisystem autoimmune diseases, systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, and in 1% of normal sera. Anti-HMG1 and
anti-HMG2 occurred at frequencies of 30% and 35% respectively in PBC. Serum
levels of anti-SOX13 and anti-HMG correlated significantly for PBC although not
for Type 1 diabetes. Anti-SOX13 in PBC may occur merely as an immune response to
products of damage to parenchymal tissue, or may be illustrative of a general
proclivity of transcriptional regulatory proteins to elicit autoimmune
responses.

PMID: 12473246 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR26: Protein Eng. 2002 Oct;15(10):817-25. 

Metal-dependent stabilization of an active HMG protein.

Bell AJ Jr, Xin H, Taudte S, Shi Z, Kallenbach NR.

Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Using a cloned single domain of the high mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1), we
evaluated the effect of introducing metal binding site(s) on protein stability
and function. An HMG domain is a conserved sequence of approximately 80 amino
acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline residues that is active in binding DNA
in a sequence- or structure-specific manner. The design strategy focuses on
anchoring selected regions of the protein, specifically loops and turns in the
molecule, using His-metal ligands. Changes in secondary structure,
thermostability and DNA binding properties of a series of such mutants were
evaluated. The two most stable mutant constructs contain three surface histidine
replacements (two metal binding sites) in the regions encompassing both turns of
the molecule. On ligation with the divalent nickel cation, the stability of
these two triple histidine mutants (I38H/N51H/D55H and G39H/N51H/D55H) increases
by 1.3 and 1.6 kcal/mol, respectively, relative to the wild-type protein,
although the creation of binding sites per se destabilizes the protein. The
DNA-binding properties of the modified proteins are not impaired by the
introduction of the metal binding motifs. These results indicate that it is
feasible to stabilize protein tertiary structure using appropriate placement of
surface His-metal bonds without loss of function.

PMID: 12468716 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR27: Eukaryot Cell. 2002 Aug;1(4):503-13. 

Two copies of mthmg1, encoding a novel mitochondrial HMG-like protein, delay
accumulation of mitochondrial DNA deletions in Podospora anserina.

Dequard-Chablat M, Allandt C.

Institut de Genetique et Microbiologie, CNRS UMR 8621, Batiment 400, Universite
Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France. chablat@igmors.u-psud.fr

In the filamentous fungus Podospora anserina, two degenerative processes which
result in growth arrest are associated with mitochondrial genome (mitochondrial
DNA [mtDNA]) instability. Senescence is correlated with mtDNA rearrangements and
amplification of specific regions (senDNAs). Premature death syndrome is
characterized by the accumulation of specific mtDNA deletions. This accumulation
is due to indirect effects of the AS1-4 mutation, which alters a cytosolic
ribosomal protein gene. The mthmg1 gene has been identified as a double-copy
suppressor of premature death. It greatly delays premature death and the
accumulation of deletions when it is present in two copies in an ASI-4 context.
The duplication of mthmg1 has no significant effect on the wild-type life span
or on senDNA patterns. In anAS1+ context, deletion of the mthmg1 gene alters
germination, growth, and fertility and reduces the life span. The deltamthmg1
senescent strains display a particular senDNA pattern. This deletion is lethal
in an AS1-4 context. According to its physical properties (very basic protein
with putative mitochondrial targeting sequence and HMG-type DNA-binding domains)
and the cellular localization of an mtHMG1-green fluorescent protein fusion,
mtHMG1 appears to be a mitochondrial protein possibly associated with mtDNA. It
is noteworthy that it is the first example of a protein combining the two
DNA-binding domains, AT-hook motif and HMG-1 boxes. It may be involved in the
stability and/or transmission of the mitochondrial genome. To date, no
structural homologues have been found in other organisms. However, mtHMG1
displays functional similarities with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial
HMG-box protein Abf2.

PMID: 12455999 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR28: Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7790-801. 

Erratum in:
    Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):3029.

A RAG-1/RAG-2 tetramer supports 12/23-regulated synapsis, cleavage, and
transposition of V(D)J recombination signals.

Swanson PC.

Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Creighton
University, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA. pswanson@creighton.edu

Initiation of V(D)J recombination involves the synapsis and cleavage of a 12/23
pair of recombination signal sequences by RAG-1 and RAG-2. Ubiquitous
nonspecific DNA-bending factors of the HMG box family, such as HMG-1, are known
to assist in these processes. After cleavage, the RAG proteins remain bound to
the cut signal ends and, at least in vitro, support the integration of these
ends into unrelated target DNA via a transposition-like mechanism. To
investigate whether the protein complex supporting synapsis, cleavage, and
transposition of V(D)J recombination signals utilized the same complement of RAG
and HMG proteins, I compared the RAG protein stoichiometries and activities of
discrete protein-DNA complexes assembled on intact, prenicked, or precleaved
recombination signal sequence (RSS) substrates in the absence and presence of
HMG-1. In the absence of HMG-1, I found that two discrete RAG-1/RAG-2 complexes
are detected by mobility shift assay on all RSS substrates tested. Both contain
dimeric RAG-1 and either one or two RAG-2 subunits. The addition of HMG-1
supershifts both complexes without altering the RAG protein stoichiometry. I
find that 12/23-regulated recombination signal synapsis and cleavage are only
supported in a protein-DNA complex containing HMG-1 and a RAG-1/RAG-2 tetramer.
Interestingly, the RAG-1/RAG-2 tetramer also supports transposition, but HMG-1
is dispensable for its activity.

PMID: 12391148 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR29: Cytokine. 2002 Aug 7;19(3):115-20. 

Cytokine expression in three mouse models of experimental hepatitis.

Sass G, Heinlein S, Agli A, Bang R, Schumann J, Tiegs G.

Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Erlangen-Nuremberg, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The activation of T-cells and macrophages and subsequent induction of cytokines
are critical factors in the development of hepatitis. Up-regulation of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. TNF has been shown to induce liver injury while
counter regulation by anti-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. IL-10 is protective. We
compared the induction of liver injury and the expression pattern of a variety
of cytokines in T-cell- versus non-T-cell-dependent mouse models of liver
injury. TNF, IFNgamma, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-12 were measured in plasma
and liver tissue after either Concanavalin A (Con A),
D-galactosamine/lipopolysaccharide (GalN/LPS) or high dose LPS induced liver
injury. Additionally, the intra-hepatic expression of the putative pathogenicity
factor high mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1) was compared in all three models.
Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12242077 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR30: Plant Physiol. 1994 Jul;105(3):911-919. 

Microheterogeneous Cytosolic High-Mobility Group Proteins from Broccoli
Co-Purify with and Are Phosphorylated by Casein Kinase II.

Klimczak LJ, Cashmore AR.

Plant Science Institute, Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6018.

A group of low molecular weight protein substrates was found to co-purify with
casein kinase II from broccoli (Brassica oleracea var italica). These substrates
showed very high affinity toward casein kinase II and were efficiently
phosphorylated even in the presence of an excess of exogenous substrates. The
broccoli substrates were purified from cytosolic extracts as a double band of
related proteins migrating at 18.7 and 20 kD. Further microheterogeneity was
revealed by anion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography and mass
spectroscopy. The actual molecular masses of the three major components
identified by mass spectroscopy were determined to be 12,691, 13,256, and 14,128
D. The substrates showed characteristic amino acid composition with a high
content of polar amino acids, including about 20% each of acidic and basic amino
acids. They were soluble in 2% trichloroacetic acid. The substrates
cross-reacted with an antibody against wheat high-mobility group protein d
(HMGd) but not HMGa. The isolated broccoli HMGs showed general DNA-binding
activity without preference for AT-rich DNA. The presence of these HMG proteins
in the cytosolic fraction is similar to the distribution characteristics of the
animal HMG-1 subgroup. On the basis of amino acid composition and DNA-binding
specificity, the isolated broccoli HMGs resemble other plant HMGs homologous to
the HMG-1 subgroup.

PMID: 12232253 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]



NR31: Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 Aug 15;104(2):148-58. 

Altered expression of novel genes in the cerebral cortex following experimental
brain injury.

Kobori N, Clifton GL, Dash P.

The Vivian L. Smith Center for Neurological Research, Department of Neurobiology
and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical School, PO Box 20708, Houston, TX
77255, USA.

Damage to the cerebral cortex results in neurological impairments such as motor,
attention, memory and executive dysfunctions. To examine the molecular
mechanisms contributing to these deficits, mRNA expression was profiled using
high-density cDNA microarray hybridization after experimental cortical impact
injury in mice. The mRNA levels at 2 h, 6 h, 24 h, 3 days and 14 days after
injury were compared with those of control animals. This revealed 86 annotated
genes and 24 expression sequence tags (ESTs) as being differentially expressed
with a 1.5-fold or greater change. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was used
to independently verify these results for selected genes. Seven functional
classes of genes were found to be altered following injury, including
transcription factors, signal transduction genes and inflammatory proteins.
While a few of these genes have been previously reported to be differentially
regulated following injury, the most of the genes have not been previously
implicated in traumatic brain injury (TBI) pathophysiology. For example,
consistent with previous reports, the transcription factor c-jun and the
neurotrophic factor bdnf mRNA levels were altered as a result of TBI. Among the
novel genes, the mRNA levels for the high mobility group protein 1 (hmg-1), the
regulator of G-protein signaling 2 (rgs-2), the transforming growth factor beta
inducible early growth response (tieg), the inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (id3),
and the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H (hnrnp h) were changed
following injury. The functional significance of these genes in neurite
outgrowth, neuronal regeneration, and plasticity following injury are discussed.

PMID: 12225869 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR32: Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(19):6797-808. 

Efficient specific DNA binding by p53 requires both its central and C-terminal
domains as revealed by studies with high-mobility group 1 protein.

McKinney K, Prives C.

Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York
10027, USA.

The nonhistone chromosomal protein high-mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1/HMGB1)
can serve as an activator of p53 sequence-specific DNA binding (L. Jayaraman, N.
C. Moorthy, K. G. Murthy, J. L. Manley, M. Bustin, and C. Prives, Genes Dev.
12:462-472, 1998). HMGB1 is capable of interacting with DNA in a
non-sequence-specific manner and causes a significant bend in the DNA helix.
Since p53 requires a significant bend in the target site, we examined whether
DNA bending by HMGB1 may be involved in its enhancement of p53 sequence-specific
binding. Accordingly, a 66-bp oligonucleonucleotide containing a p53 binding
site was locked in a bent conformation by ligating its ends to form a
microcircle. Indeed, p53 had a dramatically greater affinity for the microcircle
than for the linear 66-bp DNA. Moreover, HMGB1 augmented binding to the linear
DNA but not to the microcircle, suggesting that HMGB1 works by providing prebent
DNA to p53. p53 contains a central core sequence-specific DNA binding region and
a C-terminal region that recognizes various forms of DNA non-sequence
specifically. The p53 C terminus has also been shown to serve as an
autoinhibitor of core-DNA interactions. Remarkably, although the p53 C terminus
inhibited p53 binding to the linear DNA, it was required for the increased
affinity of p53 for the microcircle. Thus, depending on the DNA structure, the
p53 C terminus can serve as a negative or a positive regulator of p53 binding to
the same sequence and length of DNA. We propose that both DNA binding domains of
p53 cooperate to recognize sequence and structure in genomic DNA and that HMGB1
can help to provide the optimal DNA structure for p53.

PMID: 12215537 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR33: Gastroenterology. 2002 Sep;123(3):790-802. 

HMGB1 B box increases the permeability of Caco-2 enterocytic monolayers and
impairs intestinal barrier function in mice.

Sappington PL, Yang R, Yang H, Tracey KJ, Delude RL, Fink MP.

Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical School,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: High mobility group (HMG) B1 is a nonhistone nuclear protein
that was recently identified as a late-acting mediator of
lipopolysaccharide-induced lethality in mice. The proinflammatory actions of
HMGB1 have been localized to a region of the molecule called the B box. METHODS:
To determine whether HMGB1 or B box are capable of causing derangements in
intestinal barrier function, we incubated cultured Caco-2 human enterocytic
monolayers with recombinant human HMGB1 or a 74-residue truncated form of the
protein consisting of the B box domain. RESULTS: Both HMGB1 and B box increased
the permeability of Caco-2 monolayers to fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled
dextran (FD4) in a time- and dose-dependent fashion. The increase in
permeability was reversible following removal of the recombinant protein.
Exposure of Caco-2 cells to B box resulted in increased expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase messenger RNA and increased production of NO. When we used
various pharmacologic strategies to inhibit NO production or scavenge NO or
peroxynitrite (ONOO(-)), we abrogated B box-induced hyperpermeability.
Administration of B box to wild-type mice increased both ileal mucosal
permeability to FD4 and bacterial translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes. These
effects were not observed in inducible nitric oxide synthase knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the view that HMGB1 and B box are capable of
causing alterations in gut barrier function via a mechanism that depends on the
formation of NO and ONOO(-).

PMID: 12198705 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR34: Cytokine. 2002 May 21;18(4):231-6. 

HMGB-1, a DNA-binding protein with cytokine activity, induces brain TNF and IL-6
production, and mediates anorexia and taste aversion.

Agnello D, Wang H, Yang H, Tracey KJ, Ghezzi P.

Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological
Research, 20157 Milano, Italy.

High-mobility group protein-1 (HMG-1 also termed HMGB-1), a DNA-binding protein,
regulates gene transcription and stabilizes nucleosome formation. HMG-1 was
recently implicated as a cytokine, because it is a late-acting mediator of
endotoxin lethality that induces the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines from
monocytes. Here it is shown that administration of HMG-1 into the cerebral
ventricles decreases food intake (food intake=4.6g/mouse in controls vs
1.6g/mouse after 1 microg HMG-1 i.c.v.; P <0.05). Intracerebroventricular HMG-1
induced an increased in TNF and IL-6 expression in the brain, and mediated taste
aversion with potencies equivalent to LPS. In a model of endotoxemia, passive
immunization with anti-HMG-1 antibodies attenuated the development of
hypophagia, indicating that HMG-1 is a mediator of sickness behaviour associated
with endotoxemia.

PMID: 12126646 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR35: J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32438-44. Epub 2002 Jun 13. 

Specificity of the stimulatory interaction between chromosomal HMGB proteins and
the transcription factor Dof2 and its negative regulation by protein kinase
CK2-mediated phosphorylation.

Krohn NM, Yanagisawa S, Grasser KD.

Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University,
Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are
chromatin-associated proteins that can contribute to transcriptional control by
interaction with certain transcription factors. Using the transcription factor
Dof2 and five different maize HMGB proteins, we have examined the specificity of
the HMGB-transcription factor interaction. The HMG-box DNA binding domain of
HMGB1 is sufficient for the interaction with Dof2. Although all tested HMGB
proteins can interact with Dof2, the various HMGB proteins stimulate the binding
of Dof2 to its DNA target site with different efficiencies. The HMGB5 protein is
clearly the most potent facilitator of Dof2 DNA binding. Maximal stimulation of
the DNA binding by the HMGB proteins requires association of HMGB and Dof2 prior
to DNA binding. HMGB5 and Dof2 form a ternary complex with the DNA, but within
the protein-DNA complex the interaction of HMGB5 and Dof2 is different from that
in solution, as in contrast to the proteins in solution, they cannot be
cross-linked with glutaraldehyde when bound to DNA. Phosphorylation of HMGB1 by
protein kinase CK2 abolishes the interaction with Dof2 and the stimulation of
Dof2 DNA binding. These findings indicate that transcription factors may recruit
certain members of the HMGB family as assistant factors.

PMID: 12065590 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR36: Biochemistry. 2002 Jun 18;41(24):7763-70. 

Plant chromosomal HMGB proteins efficiently promote the bacterial site-specific
beta-mediated recombination in vitro and in vivo.

Stemmer C, Fernandez S, Lopez G, Alonso JC, Grasser KD.

Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University,
Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

In the presence of an accessory DNA bending protein, the bacterial site-specific
beta recombinase catalyzes resolution and DNA inversion. Five different maize
high mobility group B (HMGB) proteins were examined for their potential to
facilitate beta recombination in vitro using DNA substrates with different
intervening distances (73-913 bp) between two directly oriented recombination
(six) sites. All analyzed HMGB proteins (HMGB1 to HMGB5) could promote beta
recombination, but depending on the DNA substrate with different efficiencies.
The HMGB1 protein displayed an activity comparable to that of the natural
promoting protein Hbsu, whereas the other HMGB proteins were less effective.
Phosphorylation of the HMGB1 protein resulted in an increased efficiency of
HMGB1 to promote beta recombination. Analyses of DNA substrates with closely
spaced six sites demonstrated that in the presence of HMGB1 the recombination
rate was correlated to the distance between the six sites, but independent of
the helical orientation of the six sites. Using a Bacillus subtilis strain
defective in Hbsu, the coexpression of beta recombinase and HMGB1 (or a
truncated HMGB1 derivative) revealed that a plant HMG-box domain protein is
sufficient for assisting beta to catalyze recombination in vivo. Our results
using beta recombination as a model system suggest that the various plant HMGB
proteins (and their posttranslationally modified versions) have the potential of
forming a repertoire of different DNA structures, which is compatible with the
idea that the HMGB proteins can act as architectural factors in a variety of
nucleoprotein structures.

PMID: 12056908 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR37: Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 1;30(11):2427-34. 

Interactions between p53, hMSH2-hMSH6 and HMG I(Y) on Holliday junctions and
bulged bases.

Subramanian D, Griffith JD.

Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, CB 7295 Mason Farm Road, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

The ability of the tumor suppressor protein, p53, to recognize certain types of
DNA lesions may represent one of the mechanisms by which this protein modulates
cellular response to DNA damage. p53 DNA binding properties are regulated by
several factors, such as post-translational modifications including
phosphorylation and acetylation, regulation by its own C-terminal domain and
interactions with other cellular proteins. Substrates resembling Holliday
junctions and extra base bulges were used to study the effect of three nuclear
proteins, HMG-1, HMG I(Y) and hMSH2-hMSH6, on the lesion binding properties of
p53. Gel retardation assays revealed that the three proteins had varying effects
on p53 binding to these substrates. HMG-1 did not influence p53 binding to
Holliday junctions or 3-cytosine bulges. HMG I(Y) rapidly dissociated p53
complexes with Holliday junctions but not 3-cytosine bulges. Finally, the
mismatch repair protein complex, hMSH2-hMSH6, enhanced p53 binding to both
substrates by 3-4-fold. Together, these results demonstrate that p53 DNA binding
activity is highly influenced by the presence of other proteins, some having a
dominant effect while others have a negative effect.

PMID: 12034830 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR38: Chem Biol. 2002 May;9(5):629-38. 

Recognition of major DNA adducts of enantiomeric cisplatin analogs by HMG box
proteins and nucleotide excision repair of these adducts.

Malina J, Kasparkova J, Natile G, Brabec V.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, CZ-61265, Brno, Czech Republic.

We examined HMG domain protein recognition of major 1,2-GG intrastrand DNA
crosslinks, formed by two bifunctional enantiomeric analogs of antitumor
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin), and removal of these crosslinks
during in vitro nucleotide excision repair (NER) reactions. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays show that domains A and B of HMGB1 protein bind to
(2R,3R)-diaminobutanedichloroplatinum(II)-generated crosslinks with a higher
affinity than to those generated by (2S,3S)-diaminobutanedichloroplatinum(II).
The crosslinks of both enantiomers are removed by NER with a similar efficiency;
however, HMG1B protein significantly inhibits removal of the
(2R,3R)-diaminobutaneplatinum(II) adduct, but not that of the (2S,3S)
enantiomer. Thus, HMG domain proteins discriminate among different conformations
of the 1,2-GG intrastrand crosslinks of the two enantiomeric analogs of
cisplatin, which results in different NER of these crosslinks. This observation
may provide insight into the mechanisms underlying antitumor activity of
cisplatin and its analogs.

PMID: 12031669 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR39: Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4390-401. 

The DNA architectural protein HMGB1 displays two distinct modes of action that
promote enhanceosome assembly.

Mitsouras K, Wong B, Arayata C, Johnson RC, Carey M.

Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California 90095-1737, USA.

HMGB1 (also called HMG-1) is a DNA-bending protein that augments the affinity of
diverse regulatory proteins for their DNA sites. Previous studies have argued
for a specific interaction between HMGB1 and target proteins, which leads to
cooperative binding of the complex to DNA. Here we propose a different model
that emerged from studying how HMGB1 stimulates enhanceosome formation by the
Epstein-Barr viral activator Rta on a target gene, BHLF-1. HMGB1 stimulates
binding of individual Rta dimers to multiple sites in the enhancer. DNase I and
hydroxyl radical footprinting, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and
immobilized template assays failed to reveal stable binding of HMGB1 within the
complex. Furthermore, mutational analysis failed to identify a specific HMGB1
target sequence. The effect of HMGB1 on Rta could be reproduced by individual
HMG domains, yeast HMO1, or bacterial HU. These results, combined with the
effects of single-amino-acid substitutions within the DNA-binding surface of
HMGB1 domain A, argue for a mechanism whereby DNA-binding and bending by HMGB1
stimulate Rta-DNA complex formation in the absence of direct interaction with
Rta or a specific HMGB1 target sequence. The data contrast with our analysis of
HMGB1 action on another BHLF-1 regulatory protein called ZEBRA. We discuss the
two distinct modes of HMGB1 action on a single regulatory region and propose how
HMGB1 can function in diverse contexts.

PMID: 12024049 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR40: DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;21(3):199-212. 

Dynamics of reporter gene stimulation by HMG box proteins.

Veilleux S, Boissonneault G.

Departement de Biochimie, Faculte de Medecine, Universite de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada J1H 5N4.

Overcoming local DNA rigidity is required to perform three-dimensional
DNA-protein configuration at promoter regions. The abundant architectural
nonhistone chromosomal HMG box proteins are nonsequence-specific; however, they
have been established to specifically recognize distorted DNA. Using transient
transfection to overexpress two different members of the HMGB-1/2 family of DNA
architectural factors, we demonstrate that these proteins provide a general
enhancement in reporter gene expression irrespective of the promoter being
considered. Evidences are also provided indicating that stimulation may not be
achieved by recruitment of the proteins by regulatory factors or as a
consequence of major chromatin unfolding as previously suggested. Interestingly,
the influence of the HMG box proteins under study was overridden when the
promoters were either induced or stimulated by Trichostatin A (TSA) but
recovered upon extended induction period. These results also support the concept
that the architectural role of these proteins can contribute to the
preinitiation complex assembly required for basal transcription, but to a much
lesser extent to the poised promoter scaffolding characteristic of activated
transcription.

PMID: 12015897 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR41: Acta Biochim Pol. 2001;48(4):1131-6. 

Conformational stability of six truncated cHMG1a proteins studied in their
mixture by H/D exchange and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry.

Petry I, Wigniewski JR, Szewczuk Z.

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Wroclaw, Poland.
inga@wchuwr.chem.uni.wroc.pl

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins are abundant non-histone components of
eukaryotic chromatin. The presence of C-terminal acidic tails is a common
feature of the majority of HMG proteins. Although the biological significance of
the acidic domains is not clear, they are conferring conformational and
metabolic stability to the proteins in vitro. Moreover, the length and net
charge of the acidic tails affect the strength of HMG protein interaction with
DNA. Synthesis of an insect HMG protein by standard recombinant technology in
bacteria leads to a mixture of the intact protein (cHMG1a-(1-113) (I)) and a
series of its degradation products truncated at the C tail: cHMG1a-(1-111) (II);
cHMG1a-(1-110) (III); cHuMGla-(1-109) (IV); cHMG1a-(1-108) (V); cHMG1a-(1-107)
(VI); cHMG1a-(1-106) (VII). The proteins differ from each other only by the
number of amino-acid residues at the C-terminal tail. We used H/D exchange mass
spectrometry to characterize the stability of the proteins directly in their
mixture. The results show that the proteins I-V and VII have very similar
conformations. The protein VI is less compact and exchanges its protons faster
than the others. It may be concluded that the C-terminal tail influences the
conformation of the cHMG1a protein and that individual residues in this part of
the protein play a key role in its compactness.

PMID: 11995979 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR42: Gen Physiol Biophys. 2001 Dec;20(4):401-12. 

HMG-1 as regulatory trans-acting protein in the acute phase-induced expression
of the rat liver haptoglobin gene.

Grigorov I, Milosavljevic T, Cvetkovic I, Petrovic M.

Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute for Biological Research, Belgrade,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. iligri@ibiss.bg.ac.yu

Expression of the haptoglobin (Hp) gene is liver specific and acute phase (AP)
responsive. It was previously shown that transcriptional induction process of
the rat Hp gene during turpentine induced AP response has been mediated by the
liver nucleoprotein p29 which was shown to be homologous to the HMG-1
chromatin-associated protein. The results presented in this report offered
further evidence for the existence of structural and functional similarities
between these two proteins implicating an involvement of HMG-1 in the regulation
of the rat Hp gene transcription. By DNA binding assays we found the HMG-1
binding sites in the rat Hp gene cis-regulatory subelements A and C and revealed
an increase in its DNA-binding after induction of AP response. In view of our
previous and here shown data we assume that this increase could be a consequence
of AP-induced release of HMG-1 from the chromatin and subsequent increase in its
nuclear amount.

PMID: 11989650 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR43: Shock. 2002 Apr;17(4):329-33. 

The significance of changes in high mobility group-1 protein mRNA expression in
rats after thermal injury.

Fang WH, Yao YM, Shi ZG, Yu Y, Wu Y, Lu LR, Sheng ZY.

The Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Trauma Research Center,
Postgraduate Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

There has been a widespread impression that tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) mediate the toxicity of high doses
of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) and are key factors in septic shock.
However, the clinical efficacy of treatment with antagonists of TNF-alpha and
IL-1beta is still controversial, suggesting that mediators other than TNF-alpha
and IL-1beta might contribute causally to endotoxin-induced death. Recent
studies implicated high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein as a late mediator of
endotoxin lethality in mice. However, the role of HMG-1 in mediating multiple
organ damage-associating trauma has not been studied. This study was designed to
investigate changes in HMG-1 gene expression in vital organs, and its potential
role in mediating multiple organ damage following major burns. Wistar rats were
subjected to a 35 percent full-thickness thermal injury, and randomly divided
into three groups as follows: normal controls (n = 7), thermal injury (n = 24),
and recombinant bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (rBPI21) treatment
(n = 12). Tissue samples from liver and lungs were collected to measure tissue
endotoxin levels and HMG-1 mRNA expression. In addition, blood samples were
obtained for measurement of organ function parameters. Our data demonstrated a
significant increase in HMG-1 gene expression in tissues at 24 h postburn, which
remained markedly elevated up to 72 h after thermal injury (P< 0.05-0.01).
Treatment with rBPI21 could significantly decrease tissue HMG-1 mRNA expression
in the liver and lung (P < 0.01). In addition, there were high positive
correlations between hepatic HMG-1 mRNA and serum aminoleucine transferase (ALT)
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels, and also between pulmonary HMG-1
mRNA and myeloperoxidase activities (P < 0.05-0.01). Taken together, these
findings indicate that thermal injury per se can markedly enhance HMG-1 gene
expression in various organs. Up-regulation of HMG-1 expression may be involved
in the pathogenesis of endogenous endotoxin-mediated multiple organ damage
secondary to major burns.

PMID: 11954836 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR44: J Cell Biochem. 2002;85(2):268-78. 

Nucleolin is a calcium-binding protein.

Gilchrist JS, Abrenica B, DiMario PJ, Czubryt MP, Pierce GN.

Department of Oral Biology and Physiology, Division of Stroke and Vascular
Disease, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

We have purified a prominent 110-kDa protein (p110) from 1.6 M NaCl extracts of
rat liver nuclei that appears to bind Ca2+. p110 was originally identified by
prominent blue staining with 'Stains-All' in sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels and was observed to specifically bind ruthenium red
and 45Ca2+ in nitrocellulose blot overlays. In spin-dialysis studies, purified
p110 saturably bound approximately 75 nmol Ca2+/mg protein at a concentration of
1 mM total Ca2+ with half-maximal binding observed at 105 microM Ca2+. With
purification, p110 became increasingly susceptible to proteolytic (likely
autolytic) fragmentation, although most intermediary peptides between 40 and 90
kDa retained "Stains-All", ruthenium red, and 45Ca2+ binding. N-terminal
sequencing of intact p110 and a 70-kDa autolytic peptide fragment revealed a
strong homology to nucleolin. Two-dimensional sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)/IEF revealed autolysis
produced increasingly acidic peptide fragments ranging in apparent pI's from 5.5
for intact p110 to 3.5 for a 40 kDa peptide fragment. Intact p110 and several
peptide fragments were immunostained with a highly specific anti-nucleolin
antibody, R2D2, thus confirming the identity of this protein with nucleolin.
These annexin-like Ca2+-binding characteristics of nucleolin are likely
contributed by its highly acidic argyrophilic N-terminus with autolysis
apparently resulting in largely selective removal of its basic C-terminal
domain. Although the Ca2+-dependent functions of nucleolin are unknown, we
discuss the possibility that like the structurally analogous HMG-1, its
Ca2+-dependent actions may regulate chromatin structure, possibly during
apoptosis. Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11948683 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR45: Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2810-20. 

HMG2 interacts with the nucleosome assembly protein SET and is a target of the
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte protease granzyme A.

Fan Z, Beresford PJ, Zhang D, Lieberman J.

Center for Blood Research and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte protease granzyme A induces caspase-independent cell
death in which DNA single-stranded nicking is observed instead of
oligonucleosomal fragmentation. A 270- to 420-kDa endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex (SET complex) containing the nucleosome assembly
protein SET, the tumor suppressor pp32, and the base excision repair enzyme APE
can induce single-stranded DNA damage in isolated nuclei in a granzyme
A-dependent manner. The normal functions of the SET complex are unknown, but the
functions of its components suggest that it is involved in activating
transcription and DNA repair. We now find that the SET complex contains DNA
binding and bending activities mediated by the chromatin-associated protein
HMG2. HMG2 facilitates assembly of nucleoprotein higher-order structures by
bending and looping DNA or by stabilizing underwound DNA. HMG2 is in the SET
complex and coprecipitates with SET. By confocal microscopy, it is observed that
cytoplasmic HMG2 colocalizes with SET in association with the endoplasmic
reticulum, but most nuclear HMG2 is unassociated with SET. This physical
association suggests that HMG2 may facilitate the nucleosome assembly,
transcriptional activation, and DNA repair functions of SET and/or APE. HMG2,
like SET and APE, is a physiologically relevant granzyme A substrate in targeted
cells. HMG1, however, is not a substrate. Granzyme A cleavage after Lys65 in the
midst of HMG box A destroys HMG2-mediated DNA binding and bending functions.
Granzyme A cleavage and functional disruption of key nuclear substrates,
including HMG2, SET, APE, lamins, and histones, are likely to cripple the
cellular repair response to promote cell death in this novel caspase-independent
death pathway.

PMID: 11909973 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR46: Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(5):1340-51. 

Fine structure and activity of discrete RAG-HMG complexes on V(D)J recombination
signals.

Swanson PC.

Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University School
of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA. pswanson@creighton.edu

Two lymphoid cell-specific proteins, RAG-1 and RAG-2, initiate V(D)J
recombination by introducing DNA breaks at recombination signal sequences
(RSSs). Although the RAG proteins themselves bind and cleave DNA substrates
containing either a 12-RSS or a 23-RSS, DNA-bending proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 are
known to promote these processes, particularly with 23-RSS substrates. Using
in-gel cleavage assays and DNA footprinting techniques, I analyzed the catalytic
activity and protein-DNA contacts in discrete 12-RSS and 23-RSS complexes
containing the RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2. I found that both the
cleavage activity and the pattern of protein-DNA contacts in RAG-HMG complexes
assembled on 12-RSS substrates closely resembled those obtained from analogous
12-RSS complexes lacking HMG protein. In contrast, 23-RSS complexes containing
both RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2 exhibited enhanced cleavage activity
and displayed an altered distribution of cleavage products compared to 23-RSS
complexes containing only RAG-1 and RAG-2. Moreover, HMG-dependent heptamer
contacts in 23-RSS complexes were observed. The protein-DNA contacts in
RAG-RSS-HMG complexes assembled on 12-RSS or 23-RSS substrates were strikingly
similar at comparable positions, suggesting that the RAG proteins mediate
HMG-dependent heptamer contacts in 23-RSS complexes. Results of ethylation
interference experiments suggest that the HMG protein is positioned 5' of the
nonamer in 23-RSS complexes, interacting largely with the side of the duplex
opposite the one contacting the RAG proteins. Thus, HMG protein plays the dual
role of bringing critical elements of the 23-RSS heptamer into the same phase as
the 12-RSS to promote RAG binding and assisting in the catalysis of 23-RSS
cleavage.

PMID: 11839801 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR47: Protein Eng. 2001 Dec;14(12):1015-23. 

Interactions between HMG boxes.

Taudte S, Xin H, Bell AJ Jr, Kallenbach NR.

Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Many proteins consist of subdomains that can fold and function independently. We
investigate here the interaction between the two high mobility group (HMG) box
subdomains of the nuclear protein rHMG1. An HMG box is a conserved amino acid
sequence of approximately 80 amino acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline
side chains that is active in binding DNA in a sequence or structure-specific
manner. In the case of HMG1, each box can bind structural DNA substrates
including four-way junctions (4WJs) and branched or kinked DNA duplexes. Since
proteins containing up to six HMG boxes are known, the question arises whether
linking subdomains together influences the folding or function of individual
boxes. In an effort to understand interactions between individual DNA-binding
domains in HMG1, we created new fusion proteins: one is an inversion of the
order of the AB di-domain in HMG1 (BA); in the second, we added a third A domain
C-terminal to the AB di-domain (ABA). Pairs of boxes, AB or BA, behave similarly
and are functionally active. By contrast, the ABA triple subdomain construct is
partially unfolded and is less active than individual boxes or di-domains. Thus,
long-range inter-domain effects can influence the activity of HMG boxes.

PMID: 11809932 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR48: Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Feb;33(2):178-87. 

Molecular analysis of nonrandom 8q12 deletions in acute lymphoblastic leukemia:
identification of two candidate genes.

Bardet V, Couque N, Cattolico L, Hetet G, Devaux I, Duprat S, Gressin L, Vilmer
E, Cave H, Grandchamp B.

INSERM U409, Universite Paris 7 and Centre Claude Bernard, Paris, France.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is the most common malignancy in childhood.
High-resolution allelotyping performed in our laboratory showed new chromosomal
sites of nonrandom deletions. We have focused our work on 8q12 deletions, which
we have found in about 4% of patients (eight of 205 informative cases). These
deletions were of small size (less than 1 Mb) in all but one patient, and the
deleted region common to all patients was delineated between two microsatellite
markers (D8S1113 and D8S1763). This region was sequenced entirely from two
overlapping bacterial artificial chromosomes. The common deleted region (120 kb)
had a low GC content (37%), was composed more than 50% of LINE sequences, and
contained only two candidate genes. The centromeric deletion borders were
clustered within an interval of 33 kb between two microsatellite markers. This
interval contains the first exon of an HMG-1-related gene (KIAA0808) and a
putative gene, DL8q12, predicted to encode a protein with 231 amino acid
residues with no homolog in protein databases. Analysis of the available mRNA
from lymphoblastic cells of two patients with 8q12 deletions using common
polymorphisms in the 3' UTR of KIAA0808 showed monoallelic expression of this
gene. Identification of a biallelic polymorphism in the first exon of DL8q12
showed that this gene was deleted in two of four informative cases. Sequencing
of the exons of both genes from all patients with 8q12 deletions did not show
any mutation, which suggests that neither of these genes behaves as a classic
tumor suppressor gene. Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11793444 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR49: Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Dec 30;1522(3):175-86. 

The modulation of the biological activities of mitochondrial histone Abf2p by
yeast PKA and its possible role in the regulation of mitochondrial DNA content
during glucose repression.

Cho JH, Lee YK, Chae CB.

Department of Life Science and Division of Molecular and Life Science, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, 790-784, Pohang, South Korea.

The mitochondrial histone, Abf2p, of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is essential for
the maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and appears to play an important
role in the recombination and copy number determination of mtDNA. Abf2p, encoded
by a nuclear gene, is a member of HMG1 DNA-binding protein family and has two
HMG1-Box domains, HMG1-Box A and B. To investigate the role of Abf2p in the
control of mtDNA copy number, we asked if the in vivo functions of Abf2p are
regulated by the possible modification such as phosphorylation. We found that
the N-terminal extended segment (KRPT(21)S(22)) of HMG1-Box A is rapidly and
specifically phosphorylated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) in vitro. The
phosphorylation in this region inhibits the binding of Abf2p to all kinds of DNA
including four-way junction DNA and the supercoiling activity of Abf2p itself.
The abf2 mutant cells with an abf2(T21A/S22A) allele defective in the
phosphorylation site have a severe defect in the regulation of mtDNA content
during glucose repression in vivo. These observations suggest that the
phosphorylation via PKA, that is activated during glucose repression, may
regulate the in vivo functions of Abf2p for the control of mtDNA content during
shift from gluconeogenic to fermentative growth.

PMID: 11779632 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR50: J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7157-64. Epub 2001 Dec 17. 

HMGB1 and HMGB2 cell-specifically down-regulate the p53- and p73-dependent
sequence-specific transactivation from the human Bax gene promoter.

Stros M, Ozaki T, Bacikova A, Kageyama H, Nakagawara A.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic. stros@ibp.cs

The recently cloned gene p73 is a close homologue of p53, which is a crucial
tumor suppressor gene for preventing the malignant transformation of cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Previous reports have shown that
architectural DNA-bending/looping chromosomal proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2 (formerly
known as HMG1 and HMG2), which function in a number of biological processes
including transcription and DNA repair, interact in vitro with p53 and stimulate
p53 binding to DNA containing p53 consensus sites. Here, we report that HMGB1
physically interacts with two splicing variants of p73, alpha and beta
(pull-down assay), and enhances binding of p73 to specific cognate DNA sites
(gel-shift assay). Both HMG box domains of HMGB1, A and B, interact with
p73alpha. Association of HMGB1 with p73, like the demonstrated ability of HMGB1
to stimulate p73 binding to different p53-responsive elements, requires the
oligomerization region and/or region between DNA-binding domain and
oligomerization domain of p73 (residues 312-381). Transient transfections
revealed that ectopically expressed or endogenous HMGB1 and HMGB2 (antisense
strategy) significantly inhibit in vivo both p73alpha/beta- and p53-dependent
transactivation from the Bax gene promoter (and much less from Mdm2 and
p21(waf1) promoters) in p53-deficient SAOS-2 cells. In contrast, HMGB1 and HGMB2
stimulate p73- or p53-dependent transactivation in p53-deficient H1299 cells,
irrespective of the promoter used. Our results suggest that ubiquitously
expressed HMGB1 and HMGB2 have potential to cell- and promoter-specifically
down- or up-regulate in vivo transcriptional activity of different members of
the p53 family. A possible mechanism of HMGB1-mediated modulation of p73- and
p53-dependent transactivation is discussed.

PMID: 11748232 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR51: J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7021-8. Epub 2001 Dec 17. 

HMGB1 interacts with many apparently unrelated proteins by recognizing short
amino acid sequences.

Dintilhac A, Bernues J.

Departament de Biologia Molecular i Cel.lular, Institut de Biologia Molecular de
Barcelona, CID, Consell Superior d'Investigacions Cientifiques, Jordi Girona,
18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

The chromatin high mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1) is a very abundant and
conserved protein that is structured into two HMG box domains plus a highly
acidic C-terminal domain. From the ability to bind DNA nonspecifically and to
interact with various proteins, several functions in DNA-related processes have
been assigned to HMGB1. Nevertheless, its functional role remains the subject of
controversy. Using a phage display approach we have shown that HMGB1 can
recognize several peptide motifs. A computer search of the protein data bases
found peptide homologies with proteins already known to interact with HMGB1,
like p53, and have allowed us to identify new potential candidates. Among them,
transcriptional activators like the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K
(hnRNP K), repressors like methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), and
co-repressors like the retinoblastoma susceptibility protein (pRb) and
Groucho-related gene proteins 1 (Grg1) and 5 (Grg5) can be found. A detailed
analysis of the interaction of Grg1 with HMGB1 confirmed that the binding region
contained the sequence homologous to one of the peptides identified. Our results
have led us to propose that HMGB1 may play a central role in the stabilization
and/or assembly of several multifunctional complexes through protein-protein
interactions.

PMID: 11748221 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR52: Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;34(1):87-92. 

The binding affinity of HMG1 protein to DNA modified by cis-platin and its
analogs correlates with their antitumor activity.

Pasheva EA, Ugrinova I, Spassovska NC, Pashev IG.

Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1113 Sofia,
Bulgaria.

The antitumor activity of cis-platin is believed to result from its interaction
with cellular DNA and subsequent processing of DNA adducts by damage recognition
proteins. Among them are the high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2, which
have been hypothesized to mediate the effect of cis-platin. One possibility
suggests that the tight binding of HMG1 to DNA adducts blocks the repair of
damaged DNA. In order to further evaluate such a mechanism, several cis-platinum
complexes with known antitumor activity have been used to treat DNA and the
affinity of HMG1 to the DNA adduct induced by each drug was determined. The
dissociation constants for the complexes of HMG1 with the platinated probe were
obtained by gel mobility shift assays. The antitumor activity of the tested
platinum compounds was found to correlate with the binding affinity of HMG1 to
the respective drug-DNA adduct. These findings support the view that HMG1
contributes to cytotoxicity of cis-platin by shielding damaged DNA from repair.
In addition, they offer a fast test for screening new platinum compounds for
antitumor activity.

PMID: 11733188 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR53: Cancer Detect Prev. 2001;25(5):454-69. 

Novel human HALR (MLL3) gene encodes a protein homologous to ALR and to ALL-1
involved in leukemia, and maps to chromosome 7q36 associated with leukemia and
developmental defects.

Tan YC, Chow VT.

Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Kent Ridge.

We have identified and characterized the approximately 12-kb cDNA of a novel
human gene (designated HALR for "homologous to ALR" and given the symbol MLL3 by
the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee) for which open reading frame (ORF) encodes
a predicted large hydrophilic nuclear protein comprising 4,025 amino acids with
a calculated molecular mass of approximately 443 kD. Within the amino acid
sequence of HALR were identified a SUVAR3-9, enhancer of zeste, trithorax (SET)
domain, three plant homeodomain (PHD)-type zinc fingers, a high motility group
(HMG)-1 box, a leucine-zipper-like pattern, two potential transactivating
domains, several nuclear localization signals, and multiple nuclear receptor
interaction signature motifs. Especially within the SET domain, PHD fingers and
several other regions, the HALR protein exhibits significant similarity to ALR
(acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL]-1 related), ALL-1/myeloid/lymphoid or
mixed-lineage leukemia (ALL-1/MLL), and trithorax, evolutionarily conserved
proteins that influence differentiation and development. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated transcripts of approximately 11-12 kb, while reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that HALR is expressed
in a wide range of human tissues and cancer cell lines. The HALR gene contains
46 exons, is estimated to span >101 kb, and is located on chromosome region
7q36. Terminal 7q deletions are common chromosomal aberrations encountered in
hematological neoplasia and in holoprosencephaly 3, a midline embryonic defect
involving forebrain development. We have also isolated the partial cDNA of the
murine homologue of HALR, which displays high homology to its human counterpart.
Taking into consideration its notable protein motifs, ubiquitous expression,
evolutionary conservation and chromosomal position, HALR is likely to play a
housekeeping role in transcriptional regulation, and may be involved in
leukemogenesis and developmental disorders.

PMID: 11718452 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR54: J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1092-8. Epub 2001 Nov 1. 

Protein kinase CK2 differentially phosphorylates maize chromosomal high mobility
group B (HMGB) proteins modulating their stability and DNA interactions.

Stemmer C, Schwander A, Bauw G, Fojan P, Grasser KD.

Department of Life Science, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are architectural
factors in eukaryotic chromatin, which are involved in the regulation of various
DNA-dependent processes. We have examined the post-translational modifications
of five HMGB proteins from maize suspension cultured cells, revealing that HMGB1
and HMGB2/3, but not HMGB4 and HMGB5, are phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2.
The phosphorylation sites have been mapped to the acidic C-terminal domains by
analysis of tryptic peptides derived from HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 using nanospray ion
trap mass spectrometry. In native HMGB1, Ser(149) is constitutively
phosphorylated, whereas Ser(133) and Ser(136) are differentially phosphorylated.
The functional significance of the CK2-mediated phosphorylation of HMGB proteins
was analyzed by circular dichroism measurements showing that the phosphorylation
increases the thermal stability of the HMGB proteins. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays demonstrate that the phosphorylation reduces the affinity of the
HMGB proteins for linear DNA. The specific recognition of DNA minicircles is not
affected by the phosphorylation, but a different pattern of protein-DNA
complexes is formed. Collectively, these findings show that phosphorylation of
residues within the acidic C-terminal domain of the HMGB proteins can modulate
protein stability and the DNA binding properties of the HMGB proteins.

PMID: 11694523 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



PR55: Intervirology. 2001;44(5):311-6. 

Recombination hot spot of hepatitis B virus genome binds to members of the HMG
domain protein family and the Y box binding protein family; implication of these
proteins in genomic instability.

Kajino K, Yamamoto T, Hayashi J, Umeda T, Takahara T, Hino O.

Department of Experimental Pathology, Cancer Institute, Kami-Ikebukuro,
Toshima-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Previously we hypothesized that the occurrence of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is enhanced by genomic instability induced by the integrated
hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA. Using an in vitro recombination assay, we showed
that a subgenomic fragment of HBV DNA designated 15AB (nt1855-1914) is
indispensable for in vitro recombination, and also showed the existence of 15AB
binding protein. On the assumption that the 15AB binding protein may be a
candidate cellular recombinogenic protein which accelerates genomic instability
and hepatocarcinogenesis, we tried to isolate it by southwestern screening.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We obtained several positive clones including mouse
upstream binding factor (UBF) and DNA binding protein A (dbpA). UBF belongs to
an HMG domain protein family and dbpA belongs to a Y box binding protein family.
15AB binding seemed to be mediated by the conserved DNA binding domains in these
families, because other members in the families such as HMG1 and YB-1 also bound
to 15AB. We report them here because several documents have already suggested
the possible association of these families and DNA recombination. Copyright 2001
S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11684893 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR56: Genome Biol. 2001;2(9):RESEARCH0040. Epub 2001 Aug 30. 

Molecular archeology of an SP100 splice variant revisited: dating the
retrotranscription and Alu insertion events.

Devor EJ.

Molecular Genetics and Bioinformatics, Integrated DNA Technologies, 1710
Commercial Park, Coralville, Iowa 52241, USA. rdevor@idtdna.com

BACKGROUND: SP100 is a nuclear protein that displays a number of alternative
splice variants. In Old World monkeys, apes and humans one of these variants is
extended by a retroprocessed pseudogene, HMG1L3, whose antecedent gene is a
member of the family of high-mobility-group proteins, HMG1. This is one of only
a few documented cases of a retropseudogene being incorporated into another gene
as a functional exon. In addition to the HMG1L3 insertion, Old World monkey
genomes also contain an Alu sequence within the last SP100-HMG intron. PCR
amplification of the 3' end of the SP100 gene using genomic DNAs from human and
New World and Old World monkey species, followed by direct sequencing of the
amplicons has made dating the HMG1L3 and Alu insertion events possible. RESULTS:
PCR amplifications confirm that the HMG1L3 retrotransposition into the SP100
locus occurred after divergence of New World and Old World monkey lineages, some
35-40 million years ago. PCR amplification also shows that an upstream Alu
sequence was inserted in the last SP100-HMG intron after divergence of the Old
World monkey and ape lineages. Direct sequencing of the Alu in five Old World
monkey species places the latter event at around 19 million years ago. Finally,
ten single base mutations and one deletion in the Alu differentiate African from
Asian Old World monkey species. CONCLUSIONS: PCR and DNA sequence analysis of
'genetic fossils' such as retropseudogenes and Alu elements in primates give
details as to the timing of such events and can reveal sequence features useful
for other molecular phylogenetic applications.

PMID: 11574059 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR57: Biochemistry. 2001 Aug 28;40(34):10254-61. 

Thermodynamics of HMGB1 interaction with duplex DNA.

Muller S, Bianchi ME, Knapp S.

DIBIT, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, via Olgettina 58, 2032 Milano, Italy.

The high mobility group protein HMGB1 is a small, highly abundant protein that
binds to DNA in a non-sequence-specific manner. HMGB1 consists of 2 DNA binding
domains, the HMG boxes A and B, followed by a short basic region and a
continuous stretch of 30 glutamate or aspartate residues. Isothermal titration
calorimetry was used to characterize the binding of HMGB1 to the double-stranded
model DNAs poly(dAdT).(dTdA) and poly(dGdC).(dCdG). To elucidate the
contribution of the different structural motifs to DNA binding, calorimetric
measurements were performed comparing the single boxes A and B, the two boxes
plus or minus the basic sequence stretch (AB(bt) and AB), and the full-length
HMGB1 protein. Thermodynamically, binding of HMGB1 and all truncated constructs
to duplex DNA was characterized by a positive enthalpy change at 15 degrees C.
From the slopes of the temperature dependence of the binding enthalpies, heat
capacity changes of -0.129 +/- 0.02 and -0.105 +/- 0.05 kcal mol(-1) K(-1) were
determined for box A and full-length HMGB1, respectively. Significant
differences in the binding characteristics were observed using full-length
HMGB1, suggesting an important role for the acid tail in modulating DNA binding.
Moreover, full-length HMGB1 binds differently these two DNA templates: binding
to poly(dAdT).(dTdA) was cooperative, had a larger apparent binding site size,
and proceeded with a much larger unfavorable binding enthalpy than binding to
poly(dGdC).(dCdG).

PMID: 11513603 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR58: Biochemistry. 2001 Aug 28;40(34):10032-7. 

Amphoterin includes a sequence motif which is homologous to the Alzheimer's
beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta), forms amyloid fibrils in vitro, and binds avidly
to Abeta.

Kallijarvi J, Haltia M, Baumann MH.

Protein Chemistry Unit, Institute of Biomedicine, Biomedicum Helsinki, P.O. Box
63, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

Many of the proteins associated with amyloidoses have been found to share
structural and sequence similarities, which are believed to be responsible for
their capability to form amyloid fibrils. Interestingly, some proteins seem to
be able to form amyloid-like fibrils although they are not associated with
amyloidoses. This indicates that the ability to form amyloid fibrils may be a
general property of a greater number of proteins not associated with these
diseases. In the present work, we have searched for amyloidogenic consensus
sequences in two current protein/peptide databases and show that many proteins
share structures which can be predicted to form amyloid. One of these
potentially amyloidogenic proteins is amphoterin (also known as HMG-1), involved
in neuronal development and a ligand for the receptor for advanced glycation end
products (RAGE). It contains an amyloidogenic peptide fragment which is highly
homologous to the Alzheimer's amyloid beta-peptide. If enzymatically released
from the native protein, it forms amyloid-like fibrils which are visible in
electron microscopy, exhibit apple green birefringence under polarized light
after Congo red staining, and increases thioflavin T fluorescence. This fragment
also shows high affinity to Abeta as a free peptide or while part of the native
protein. Our results support the hypothesis that the potential to form amyloid
is a common characteristic of a number of proteins, independent of their
relation to amyloidoses, and that this potential can be predicted based on the
physicochemical properties of these proteins.

PMID: 11513581 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR59: J Virol. 2001 Sep;75(18):8742-51. 

Borna disease virus phosphoprotein binds a neurite outgrowth factor,
amphoterin/HMG-1.

Kamitani W, Shoya Y, Kobayashi T, Watanabe M, Lee BJ, Zhang G, Tomonaga K, Ikuta
K.

Department of Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The Borna disease virus (BDV) p24 phosphoprotein is an abundant protein in
BDV-infected cultured cells and animal brains. Therefore, there is a possibility
that binding of the p24 protein to cellular factor(s) induces functional
alterations of infected neural cells in the brain. To identify a cellular
protein(s) that interacts with BDV p24 protein, we performed far-Western
blotting with extracts from various cell lines. Using recombinant p24 protein as
a probe, we detected a 30-kDa protein in all cell lines examined. Binding
between the 30-kDa and BDV p24 proteins was also demonstrated using BDV p24
affinity and ion-exchange chromatography columns. Microsequence analysis of the
purified 30-kDa protein revealed that its N terminus showed complete homology
with rat amphoterin protein, which is a neurite outgrowth factor abundant in the
brain during development. Mammalian two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses
also confirmed that amphoterin is a specific target for the p24 protein in vivo.
Furthermore, we showed that infection by BDV, as well as purified p24 protein in
the medium, significantly decreased cell process outgrowth of cells grown on
laminin, indicating the functional inhibition of amphoterin by interaction with
the p24 protein. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed decreased levels of
amphoterin protein at the leading edges of BDV-infected cells. Moreover, the
expression of the receptor for advanced glycation end products, of which the
extracellular moiety is a receptor for amphoterin, was not significantly
activated in BDV-infected cells during the process of extension, suggesting that
the secretion of amphoterin from the cell surface is inhibited by the binding of
the p24 protein. These results suggested that BDV infection may cause direct
damage in the developing brain by inhibiting the function of amphoterin due to
binding by the p24 phosphoprotein.

PMID: 11507219 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR60: Biochem Soc Trans. 2001 Aug;29(Pt 4):395-401. 

HMG1 and 2: architectural DNA-binding proteins.

Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry, 80
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK. jot1@bioc.cam.ac.uk

HMG1 and 2 (high mobility group proteins 1 and 2; renamed HMGB1 and 2) contain
two DNA-binding HMG-box domains (A and B) and a long acidic C-terminal domain.
They bind DNA without sequence specificity, but have a high affinity for bent or
distorted DNA, and bend linear DNA. The individual A and B boxes (which,
although broadly similar, show both structural and functional differences)
exhibit many of the structure-specific properties of the whole protein. The
acidic tail modulates the affinity of the tandem HMG boxes in HMG1 and 2 for a
variety of DNA targets, including four-way junctions, but not distorted DNA
minicircles, to which the proteins bind with very high affinity. HMG1 and 2
appear to play important architectural roles in the assembly of nucleoprotein
complexes in a variety of biological processes, for example V(D)J recombination,
the initiation of transcription, and DNA repair.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11497996 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR61: J Mol Biol. 2001 May 25;309(1):79-88. 

Structural requirements for cooperative binding of HMG1 to DNA minicircles.

Webb M, Payet D, Lee KB, Travers AA, Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, UK.

DNA minicircles, where the length of DNA is below the persistence length, are
highly effective, preferred, ligands for HMG-box proteins. The proteins bind to
them "structure-specifically" with affinities in the nanomolar range, presumably
to an exposed widened minor groove. To understand better the basis of this
preference, we have studied the binding of HMG1 (which has two tandem HMG boxes
linked by a basic extension to a long acidic tail) and Drosophila HMG-D (one HMG
box linked by a basic region to a short and less acidic tail), and their HMG-box
domains, to 88 bp and 75 bp DNA minicircles. In some cases we see cooperative
binding of two molecules to the circles. The requirements for strong
cooperativity are two HMG boxes and the basic extension; the latter also appears
to stabilize and constrain the complex, preventing binding of further protein
molecules. HMG-D, with a single HMG box, does not bind cooperatively. In the
case of HMG1, the acidic tail is not required for cooperativity and does not
affect binding significantly, in contrast to a much greater effect with linear
DNA, or even four-way junctions (another distorted DNA substrate). Such effects
could be relevant in the hierarchy of binding of HMG-box proteins to DNA
distortions in vivo, where both single-box and two-box proteins might co-exist,
with or without basic extensions and acidic tails.

PMID: 11491303 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR62: EMBO J. 2001 Jul 2;20(13):3506-17. 

Spt16-Pob3 and the HMG protein Nhp6 combine to form the nucleosome-binding
factor SPN.

Formosa T, Eriksson P, Wittmeyer J, Ginn J, Yu Y, Stillman DJ.

Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, 50 N. Medical
Drive Rm 211, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Tim.Formosa@hsc.utah.edu

Yeast Spt16/Cdc68 and Pob3 form a heterodimer that acts in both DNA replication
and transcription. This is supported by studies of new alleles of SPT16
described here. We show that Spt16-Pob3 enhances HO transcription through a
mechanism that is affected by chromatin modification, since some of the defects
caused by mutations can be suppressed by deleting the histone deacetylase Rpd3.
While otherwise conserved among many eukaryotes, Pob3 lacks the HMG1 DNA-binding
motif found in similar proteins such as the SSRP1 subunit of human FACT. SPT16
and POB3 display strong genetic interactions with NHP6A/B, which encodes an HMG1
motif, suggesting that these gene products function coordinately in vivo. While
Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 do not appear to form stable heterotrimers, Nhp6 binds to
nucleosomes and these Nhp6-nucleosomes can recruit Spt16-Pob3 to form
SPN-nucleosomes. These complexes have altered electrophoretic mobility and a
distinct pattern of enhanced sensitivity to DNase I. These results suggest that
Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 cooperate to function as a novel nucleosome reorganizing
factor.

PMID: 11432837 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR63: Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 3;40(26):7860-7. 

Differential chromatin association and nucleosome binding of the maize HMGA,
HMGB, and SSRP1 proteins.

Lichota J, Grasser KD.

Department of Life Science, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

In plants, chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins have been identified
in the HMGA family, containing A/T-hook DNA binding motifs, and in the HMGB
family, containing an HMG-box DNA binding domain, that are considered
architectural factors in chromatin. We have characterized the association of the
HMGA protein, five different HMGB proteins, and the structure-specific
recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) with maize chromatin by extraction experiments
using NaCl, ethidium bromide, spermine, and distamycin A. The difference in the
release of the proteins from chromatin by these reagents indicates that they are
differentially associated with chromatin. This was confirmed by treatment of
chromatin with micrococcal nuclease, demonstrating that the HMGA, HMGB2/3, and
SSRP1 proteins are enriched in the highly nuclease-sensitive fraction of
chromatin, which is likely to be transcriptionally competent. As examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift analyses, the HMGA protein and the proteins
containing an HMG domain (HMGB proteins and SSRP1) bind specifically to purified
maize mononucleosomes that contain a histone octamer and approximately 165 bp of
DNA. The mode of interaction with the nucleosomes differs for HMGA and HMGB
proteins. In the case of the HMGB1 protein, the full-length protein is required
for specific nucleosome binding, as the individual HMG-box DNA binding domain
(which is sufficient for DNA interactions) interacts nonspecifically with the
nucleosomes. Collectively, these findings indicate that HMGA, the various HMGB
proteins, and SSPR1 are differentially associated with plant chromatin and may
act as architectural factors in different nucleoprotein structures.

PMID: 11425313 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR64: Biochemistry. 2001 Jun 26;40(25):7533-41. 

Laser-induced photo-cross-linking of cisplatin-modified DNA to HMG-domain
proteins.

Mikata Y, He Q, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.

Laser-induced photo-cross-linking was investigated for DNA, modified with
cisplatin at specific sites, bound to structure-specific recognition domains of
proteins in the high-mobility group (HMG) class. The efficiency of
photo-cross-linking depends on the wavelength and power of the laser, the nature
of the protein domain, and the oligodeoxyribonucleotide sequences flanking the
platinated site. Introduction of 5-iodouridine at thymine sites of the
oligodeoxyribonucleotide as an additional photoreactive group did not increase
the photo-cross-linking yield. Formation of platinum-mediated DNA-DNA
interstrand cross-linking observed previously upon irradiation with 302 nm light
[Kane, S. A., and Lippard, S. J. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 2180-2188] was
significantly reduced with laser irradiation. HMG1 domain B is superior to
domain A for platinum-mediated photo-cross-linking, a result attributed to the
different positioning of the proteins with respect to the platinum adduct and
the greater ability of domain B to access photolabilized platinum in the major
groove. Studies with proteins containing specifically mutated amino acids, and
with DNA probes in which the sequences flanking the platinum cross-link site
were varied, suggest that the most effective photo-cross-linking occurs for
protein domains bound symmetrically and flexibly to cisplatin-modified DNA. The
thermodynamic equilibrium between the protein-platinated DNA complex and its
components, revealed in gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), is
significantly shifted to the right upon irreversible photo-cross-linking. Thus,
only upon photo-cross-linking can the interaction of cisplatin-DNA
1,3-intrastrand d(GpTpG) or interstrand cross-links with HMG1 domain B protein
be detected. Photo-cross-linking is thus an effective tool for investigating the
interaction of cisplatin-modified DNA with damage-recognition proteins under
heterogeneous conditions such those in cell extracts or living cells.

PMID: 11412107 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR65: Gene. 2001 May 30;270(1-2):161-9. 

Molecular evolution of Sry and Sox gene.

Nagai K.

Tokyo Medical University, Department of Biochemistry, 160-8402, Tokyo, Japan.
kozo-nag@tokyo-med.ac.jp

The mammalian Sry on the short arm of the Y chromosome encodes a nuclear
factor-like protein harboring a DNA-binding domain known as the HMG box. The Sox
genes encode similar factor like proteins, but the sequence similarity of the
HMG box to that of Sry is variable as being at least 60%. The functional
relationship of Sox to Sry genes with special reference to sex determination is
unclear except for a few items such as human autosomal Sox9. Thus, it is
significant to know more about the evolutionary in addition to the functional
relationship between Sry and Sox genes for deepening and broadening our
understanding concerning primary sex determination. Therefore, to clarify the
ancestry and molecular evolution of the mammalian sex determining gene Sry with
its evolutionary relationships to the Sox gene, a molecular phylogenetic tree
for the HMG box superfamily was constructed and analyzed, and the following
conclusions were reached: (1) The nuclear non histone HMG proteins are
supposedly the oldest, appearing at least more than one billion years ago,
before the divergence of animals and plants. They diverged into two subgroups:
one contains HMG14 and HMG17, and the other one contains HMG1 and HMG2 with
various other genes. Subsequent divergences include the nucleolar UBF, nuclear
SSRP as well as fungal mating protein Mc, MAT and Ste11. (2) The Sox and Sry
genes diverged following the diversification of lymphoid transcription factors
TCF and LEF. The Sry gene might have definitely evolved from the Sox gene
cluster a few hundred million years ago. Additionally, the marsupial Sry, e.g.
from Wallabie's and Dunnart's, is distinguished by being distant from eutherian
Sry, but being closely related to the Sox gene cluster. (3) Molecular
evolutionary rates estimated in mammalian Sry as the divergent rate per 100
million years are much higher than in Sox genes or other genes from the HMG box
superfamily. This rapid evolution of Sry might agree with the fact that the Srys
are present not on the pseudoautosomal region but on the distal region with no
recombination of the Y chromosomal short arm.

PMID: 11404013 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR66: J Mol Biol. 2001 Jun 22;309(5):1101-15. 

Biochemical characterization of the structure-specific DNA-binding protein Cmb1
from Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Sassoon J, Lilie H, Baumann U, Kohli J.

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Berne, Freiestrasse 3,
Berne, 3012, Switzerland. sassoon@ibc.unibe.ch

Cmb1, a novel HMG box protein from Schizosaccharomyces pombe, has been
characterized biochemically using glutaraldehyde cross-linking, gel-filtration
and analytical ultracentrifugation. It was identified as a monomeric,
non-spherical protein, with a tendency to aggregate in solution. Limited
proteolysis with trypsin and chymotrypsin showed that the C-terminal HMG box was
a compact, proteolytically stable domain and the N-terminal region of Cmb1 was
relatively unstructured and more easily digested.As Cmb1 was previously
identified as a potential mismatch-binding protein, the binding constants and
stoichiometry for both homoduplex and heteroduplex DNA were determined using an
IASys resonant mirror biosensor. Cmb1 indeed demonstrated a tighter association
with mismatched DNA, especially with the C/Delta-mismatch. Expression constructs
of Cmb1 were made to study the sections of the protein involved in DNA binding.
Constructs with the N-terminal region absent revealed that the C-terminal HMG
box was the primary DNA-binding region. The presence of the N-terminal region
did, however, facilitate tighter binding to both homoduplex and heteroduplex
DNA. The amino acid residues isoleucine 14 and leucine 39 were located as
putative intercalating residues using structure guided homology modelling. The
model templates were derived from two distinct HMG:DNA complexes: HMG-D bound to
homoduplex DNA and HMG 1 bound to cisplatin DNA. Binding studies using the Cmb1
HMG box with point mutations in these residues showed that isoleucine 14 was
important for the binding of Cmb1 to homoduplex DNA, but affected binding to
mismatches to a lesser extent. In contrast, leucine 39 appeared to have a more
significant function in binding to mismatched DNA. Copyright 2001 Academic
Press.

PMID: 11399082 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR67: J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32597-605. Epub 2001 Jun 4. 

The binding interaction of HMG-1 with the TATA-binding protein/TATA complex.

Das D, Scovell WM.

Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio
43403, USA.

High mobility protein-1 (HMG-1) has been shown to regulate transcription by RNA
polymerase II. In the context that it acts as a transcriptional repressor, it
binds to the TATA-binding protein (TBP) to form the HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex,
which is proposed to inhibit the assembly of the preinitiation complex. By using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show that the acidic C-terminal domain
of HMG-1 and the N terminus of human TBP are the domains that are essential for
the formation of a stable HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex. HMG-1 binding increases the
affinity of TBP for the TATA element by 20-fold, which is reflected in a
significant stimulation of the rate of TBP binding, with little effect on the
dissociation rate constant. In support of the binding target of HMG-1 being the
N terminus of hTBP, the N-terminal polypeptide of human TBP competes with and
inhibits HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex formation. Deletion of segments of the N
terminus of human TBP was used to map the region(s) where HMG-1 binds. These
findings indicate that interaction of HMG-1 with the Q-tract (amino acids 55-95)
in hTBP is primarily responsible for stable complex formation. In addition,
HMG-1 and the monoclonal antibody, 1C2, specific to the Q-tract, compete for the
same site. Furthermore, calf thymus HMG-1 forms a stable complex with the
TBP/TATA complex that contains TBP from either human or Drosophila but not
yeast. This is again consistent with the importance of the Q-tract for this
stable interaction and shows that the interaction extends over many species but
does not include yeast TBP.

PMID: 11390376 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR68: Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jun;268(11):3154-62. 

HMG-1 enhances HMG-I/Y binding to an A/T-rich enhancer element from the pea
plastocyanin gene.

Webster CI, Packman LC, Gray JC.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Plant Sciences,
University of Cambridge, UK.

High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind at overlapping sites within
the A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene. Competition binding
experiments revealed that HMG-1 enhanced the binding of HMG-I/Y to a 31-bp
region (P31) of the enhancer. Circularization assays showed that HMG-1, but not
HMG-I/Y, was able to bend a linear 100-bp DNA containing P31 so that the ends
could be ligated. HMG-1, but not HMG-I/Y, showed preferential binding to the
circular 100-bp DNA compared with the equivalent linear DNA, indicating that
alteration of the conformation of the DNA by HMG-1 was not responsible for
enhanced binding of HMG-I/Y. Direct interaction of HMG-I/Y and HMG-1 in the
absence of DNA was demonstrated by binding of 35S-labeled proteins to
immobilized histidine-tagged proteins, and this was due to an interaction of the
N-terminal HMG-box-containing region of HMG-1 and the C-terminal AT-hook region
of HMG-I/Y. Kinetic analysis using the IAsys biosensor revealed that HMG-1 had
an affinity for immobilized HMG-I/Y (Kd = 28 nM) similar to that for immobilized
P31 DNA. HMG-1-enhanced binding of HMG-I/Y to the enhancer element appears to be
mediated by the formation of an HMG-1-HMG-I/Y complex, which binds to DNA with
the rapid loss of HMG-1.

PMID: 11389716 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR69: Protein Sci. 2001 Mar;10(3):504-18. 

HMG-D complexed to a bulge DNA: an NMR model.

Cerdan R, Payet D, Yang JC, Travers AA, Neuhaus D.

M.R.C. Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

An NMR model is presented for the structure of HMG-D, one of the DROSOPHILA:
counterparts of mammalian HMG1/2 proteins, bound to a particular distorted DNA
structure, a dA(2) DNA bulge. The complex is in fast to intermediate exchange on
the NMR chemical shift time scale and suffers substantial linebroadening for the
majority of interfacial resonances. This essentially precludes determination of
a high-resolution structure for the interface based on NMR data alone. However,
by introducing a small number of additional constraints based on chemical shift
and linewidth footprinting combined with analogies to known structures, an
ensemble of model structures was generated using a computational strategy
equivalent to that for a conventional NMR structure determination. We find that
the base pair adjacent to the dA(2) bulge is not formed and that the protein
recognizes this feature in forming the complex; intermolecular NOE enhancements
are observed from the sidechain of Thr 33 to all four nucleotides of the DNA
sequence step adjacent to the bulge. Our results form the first experimental
demonstration that when binding to deformed DNA, non-sequence-specific HMG
proteins recognize the junction between duplex and nonduplex DNA. Similarities
and differences of the present structural model relative to other HMG-DNA
complex structures are discussed.

PMID: 11344319 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR70: Shock. 2001 Apr;15(4):247-53. 

HMG-1 rediscovered as a cytokine.

Yang H, Wang H, Tracey KJ.

Laboratory of Biomedical Science, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset,
New York 11030, USA.

High-mobility group-1 (HMG-1), an abundant, highly conserved cellular protein,
is widely known as a nuclear DNA-binding protein that stabilizes nucleosome
formation, facilitates gene transcription, and regulates the activity of steroid
hormone receptors. We discovered that HMG-1 is a late mediator of delayed
endotoxin lethality. When released by activated monocytes, it participates in
the development of lethality and it activates downstream cytokine release. This
review covers the general features of HMG-1 and its newly appreciated role as a
cytokine.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11303722 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR71: Biochemistry. 2001 Apr 17;40(15):4769-79. 

Two mutations of basic residues within the N-terminus of HMG-1 B domain with
different effects on DNA supercoiling and binding to bent DNA.

Stros M.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic. stros@ibp.cz

High mobility group (HMG) 1 protein and its two homologous DNA-binding domains,
A and B ("HMG-boxes"), can bend and supercoil DNA in the presence of
topoisomerase I, as well as recognize differently bent and distorted DNA
structures, including four-way DNA junctions, supercoiled DNA and DNA modified
with anticancer drug cisplatin. Here we show that the lysine-rich part of the
linker region between A and B domains of HMG-1, the (85)TKKKFKD(91) sequence
that is attached to the N-terminus of the B domain within HMG-1, is a
prerequisite for a preferential binding of the B domain to supercoiled DNA. The
above sequence is also essential for a high-affinity binding of the B domain to
DNA containing a site-specific major 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand DNA adduct of
cisplatin. Mutation of Arg(97), but not Lys(90) [Lys(90) forms a specific
cross-link with platinum(II) in major groove of cisplatin-modified DNA; Kane, S.
A., and Lippard, S. J. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 2180--2188], to alanine
significantly (>40-fold) reduces affinity of the B domain to cisplatin-modified
DNA, inhibits the ability of the B domain to bend (ligase-mediated
circularization) or supercoil DNA, and results in a loss of the preferential
binding of the B domain to supercoiled DNA without affecting the
structural-specificity of the HMG-box for four-way DNA junctions. Some of the
reported activities of the B domain are enhanced when the B domain is covalently
linked to the A domain. We propose that binding of the A/B linker region within
the major DNA groove helps the two HMG-1 domains to anchor to the minor DNA
groove to facilitate their DNA binding and other activities.

PMID: 11294645 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR72: J Neurochem. 2001 Apr;77(1):120-31. 

Identity of nuclear high-mobility-group protein, HMG-1, and sulfoglucuronyl
carbohydrate-binding protein, SBP-1, in brain.

Chou DK, Evans JE, Jungalwala FB.

Department of Biomedical Sciences, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, Center for Mental
Retardation, Waltham, Massachusetts 02452, USA.

High-mobility-group (HMG) proteins are a family of non-histone chromosomal
proteins which bind to DNA. They have been implicated in multiple aspects of
gene regulation and cellular differentiation. Sulfoglucuronyl carbohydrate
binding protein, SBP-1, which is also localized in the neuronal nuclei, was
shown to be required for neurite outgrowth and neuronal migration during
development of the nervous system. In order to establish relationship between
SBP-1 and HMG family proteins, two HMG proteins were isolated and purified from
developing rat cerebellum by heparin-sepharose and sulfatide-octyl-sepharose
affinity column chromatography and their biochemical and biological properties
were compared with those of SBP-1. Characterization by high performance liquid
chromatography--mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS), partial peptide sequencing and
western blot analysis showed the isolated HMG proteins to be HMG-1 and HMG-2.
Isoelectric focusing, HPLC-MS and peptide sequencing data also suggested that
HMG-1 and SBP-1 were identical. Similar to SBP-1, both HMG proteins bound
specifically to sulfated glycolipids, sulfoglucuronylglycolipids (SGGLs),
sulfatide and seminolipid in HPTLC-immuno-overlay and solid-phase binding
assays. The HMG proteins promoted neurite outgrowth in dissociated cerebellar
cells, which was inhibited by SGGLs, anti-Leu7 hybridoma (HNK-1) and anti-SBP-1
peptide antibodies, similar to SBP-1. The proteins also promoted neurite
outgrowth in explant cultures of cerebellum. The results showed that the
cerebellar HMG-1 and -2 proteins have similar biochemical and biological
properties and HMG-1 is most likely identical to SBP-1.

PMID: 11279268 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR73: J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16257-64. Epub 2001 Jan 30. 

New insights into host factor requirements for prokaryotic
beta-recombinase-mediated reactions in mammalian cells.

Diaz V, Servert P, Prieto I, Gonzalez MA, Martinez-A C, Alonso JC, Bernad A.

Departamento de Inmunologia y Oncologia and Biotecnologia Microbiana, Centro
Nacional de Biotecnologia, CSIC, Campus Universidad Autonoma de Madrid,
Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

The prokaryotic beta-recombinase catalyzes site-specific recombination between
two directly oriented minimal six sites in mammalian cells, both on episomic and
chromatin-integrated substrates. Using a specific recombination activated gene
expression system, we report the site-specific recombination activity of an
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) fused version of beta-recombinase
(beta-EGFP). This allows expression of active beta-recombinase detectable in
vivo and in fixed cells by fluorescence microscopy. In addition, cellular
viability is compatible with a substantial level of expression of the beta-EGFP
protein. Using fluorescence-activated cell sorting, we have been able to enrich
cell populations expressing this fusion protein. Application of this strategy
has allowed us to study in more depth the host factor requirements for this
system. Previous work showed that eukaryotic HMG1 protein was necessary and
sufficient to help beta-recombinase activity in vitro. The influence of ectopic
expression of HMG1 protein in the recombination process has been analyzed,
indicating that HMG1 overexpression does not lead to a significant increase on
the efficiency of beta-recombinase-mediated recombination both on episomal
substrates and chromatin-associated targets. In addition,
beta-recombinase-mediated recombination has been demonstrated in HMG1 deficient
cells at the same levels as in wild type cells. These data demonstrate the
existence of cellular factors different from HMG-1 that can act as helpers for
beta-recombinase activity in the eukaryotic environment.

PMID: 11278972 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR74: J Biochem (Tokyo). 2001 Apr;129(4):643-51. 

HMG box A in HMG2 protein functions as a mediator of DNA structural alteration
together with box B.

Nakamura Y, Yoshioka  K, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo,
Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

Nonhistone protein HMG2, like HMG1, binds with B-DNA in a sequence-nonspecific
manner and causes structural alterations in DNA such as bending, kinking and
unwinding. Here, we studied the functions of HMG2 domains in the DNA structural
alteration and modulation by using various HMG2 peptides, and we demonstrated
several new findings. The HMG box itself as a DNA-binding motif may have the
basic function of inducing curvature, resulting in the apparent DNA bending in
the DNA cyclization assay, but not of abruptly kinking DNA. The DNA-binding
activity of HMG box B, which is enhanced by the presence of box A, together with
the flanking regions of box B, causes DNA bending accompanying the kinking of
the DNA main chain. The DNA unwinding accompanied by DNA kinking diminishes
cruciform structures in supercoiled DNA. Analysis using mutant peptides for box
A confirmed that box A in HMG2 functions as a mediator of DNA structural
alteration together with box B. The present studies on the functional properties
of the respective regions of HMG2 may help to elucidate the protein function.

PMID: 11275566 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR75: J Cell Biol. 2001 Mar 19;152(6):1197-206. 

The high mobility group (HMG) boxes of the nuclear protein HMG1 induce
chemotaxis and cytoskeleton reorganization in rat smooth muscle cells.

Degryse B, Bonaldi T, Scaffidi P, Muller S, Resnati M, Sanvito F, Arrigoni G,
Bianchi ME.

Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Milan, 20133 Milan,
Italy. degryse@scripps.edu

HMG1 (high mobility group 1) is a ubiquitous and abundant chromatin component.
However, HMG1 can be secreted by activated macrophages and monocytes, and can
act as a mediator of inflammation and endotoxic lethality. Here we document a
role of extracellular HMG1 in cell migration. HMG1 (and its individual
DNA-binding domains) stimulated migration of rat smooth muscle cells in
chemotaxis, chemokinesis, and wound healing assays. HMG1 induced rapid and
transient changes of cell shape, and actin cytoskeleton reorganization leading
to an elongated polarized morphology typical of motile cells. These effects were
inhibited by antibodies directed against the receptor of advanced glycation
endproducts, indicating that the receptor of advanced glycation endproducts is
the receptor mediating the HMG1-dependent migratory responses. Pertussis toxin
and the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor PD98059 also blocked
HMG1-induced rat smooth muscle cell migration, suggesting that a G(i/o) protein
and mitogen-activated protein kinases are required for the HMG1 signaling
pathway. We also show that HMG1 can be released by damage or necrosis of a
variety of cell types, including endothelial cells. Thus, HMG1 has all the
hallmarks of a molecule that can promote atherosclerosis and restenosis after
vascular damage.

PMID: 11257120 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR76: Trends Biochem Sci. 2001 Mar;26(3):167-74. 

Erratum in:
    Trends Biochem Sci 2001 Apr;26(4):219.

HMG1 and 2, and related 'architectural' DNA-binding proteins.

Thomas JO, Travers AA.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis
Court Road, Cambridge, UK CB2 1GA. jot1@bioc.cam.ac.uk

The HMG-box proteins, one of the three classes of high mobility group (HMG)
chromosomal proteins, bend DNA and bind preferentially to distorted DNA
structures. The proteins appear to act primarily as architectural facilitators
in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes; for example, in effecting
recombination and in the initiation of transcription. HMG-box proteins might be
targeted to particular DNA sites in chromatin by either protein-protein
interactions or recognition of specific DNA structures.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 11246022 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR77: Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 15;61(4):1569-77. 

Gene expression patterns associated with the metastatic phenotype in rodent and
human tumors.

Nestl A, Von Stein OD, Zatloukal K, Thies WG, Herrlich P, Hofmann M, Sleeman JP.

Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Germany.

Using subtractive technology, we have generated metastasis-associated gene
expression profiles for rat mammary and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Several
genes whose expression is thought to be related to tumor progression such as
c-Met, urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor, ezrin, HMG-1, oncomodulin,
cathepsin, and caveolin were thereby isolated. Half of the metastasis-associated
clones showed no significant homology to genes with known function. Notably,
several of the metastasis-associated clones were also expressed in metastatic
lines but not in nonmetastatic lines of other tumor models. Furthermore, in situ
hybridization using selected clones documents the relevance of these results for
human cancer because strong expression in tumor cells including metastases was
detected in human colorectal cancer samples and, to a lesser extent, in mammary
cancer samples. These data support the concept that tumors express a "metastatic
program" of genes.

PMID: 11245467 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR78: Autoimmunity. 2000 Dec;32(4):281-91. 

Detection of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice and
analysis of their target antigens.

Ma W, Ozaki S, Sobajima J, Uesugi H, Murakami M, Tanaka M, Kozuki M, Hashimoto
H, Fujita Y, Kawabata D, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Hayami M, Nakao K.

Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) have been widely studied and
recognized to be clinically very important for some human diseases including
systemic rheumatic diseases. We analyzed ANCA response and their target antigens
in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr (MRL-lpr) mice, an animal model of systemic rheumatic disease.
P-ANCA was detected in 57% of the mice. Antibodies to the known P-ANCA target
antigens at the same age were examined. Among these, antibodies to high mobility
group (HMG) proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were detected in 57% of the mice, 75% of
which were also positive for P-ANCA. These anti-HMG1/HMG2 activities were
absorbed by preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. In contrast,
antibodies to myeloperoxidase and cathepsin G were detected in 14% and 7%,
respectively, but these activities were not inhibited by preincubation with
corresponding antigens. In addition, the titers of P-ANCA and anti-HMG1/HMG2
antibodies in MRL-lpr mice were significantly correlated with each other. Thus,
HMG1 and HMG2 were considered to be significant target antigens of P-ANCA in
MRL-lpr mice.

PMID: 11191287 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR79: EMBO J. 2000 Dec 15;19(24):6804-13. 

Chromatin-mediated transcriptional regulation by the yeast architectural factors
NHP6A and NHP6B.

Moreira JM, Holmberg S.

Department of Genetics, Institute of Molecular Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Oster Farimagsgade 2A, DK-1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae NHP6A and NHP6B proteins are chromatin
architectural factors, functionally and structurally related to the mammalian
high mobility group (HMG)-1 and -2 proteins, a family of non-sequence-specific
DNA binding proteins. nhp6a nhp6b mutants have various morphological defects and
are defective in the induced expression of several RNA polymerase II-transcribed
genes. We found that NHP6A/B proteins are also required for full induction of
the yeast CHA1 gene. Importantly, CHA1 basal level expression is increased
10-fold in an nhp6a nhp6b double deletion mutant. Micrococcal nuclease and DNase
I analysis of the CHA1 gene in this strain showed an open promoter structure,
characteristic of the activated state of this promoter, even under non-inducing
conditions. To address the possible function of the NHP6A/B proteins in
chromatin-mediated gene regulation, we performed whole-genome transcriptional
profiling of a Deltanhp6a Deltanhp6b yeast strain. Our results suggest that
NHP6A/B proteins play an important regulatory role, repressing as well as
potentiating expression of genes involved in several cellular processes, and
that NHP6A/B control is exerted at the level of the individual gene.

PMID: 11118215 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR80: J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7534-40. Epub 2000 Dec 5. 

Interaction with p53 enhances binding of cisplatin-modified DNA by high mobility
group 1 protein.

Imamura T, Izumi H, Nagatani G, Ise T, Nomoto M, Iwamoto Y, Kohno K.

Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 807-8555, Japan.

A nonhistone chromosomal protein, high mobility group (HMG) 1, is ubiquitous in
higher eukaryotic cells and binds preferentially to cisplatin-modified DNA. HMG1
also functions as a coactivator of p53, a tumor suppressor protein. We
investigated physical interactions between HMG1 and p53 and the influence of p53
on the ability of HMG1 to recognize damaged DNA. Using immunochemical
coprecipitation, we observed binding of HMG1 and p53. Interaction between HMG1
and p53 required the HMG A box of HMG1 and amino acids 363-376 of p53.
Cisplatin-modified DNA binding by HMG1 was significantly enhanced by p53. An
HMG1-specific antibody that recognized the A box of this protein also stimulated
cisplatin-modified DNA binding. These data suggest that an interaction with
either p53 or antibody may induce conformational change in the HMG1 A box that
optimizes DNA binding by HMG1. Interaction of p53 with HMG1 after DNA damage may
promote activation of specific HMG1 binding to damaged DNA in vivo and provide a
molecular link between DNA damage and p53-mediated DNA repair.

PMID: 11106654 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR81: J Mol Biol. 2000 Dec 8;304(4):529-40. 

Phage display screening reveals an association between germline-specific
transcription factor Oct-4 and multiple cellular proteins.

Butteroni C, De Felici M, Scholer HR, Pesce M.

Gene Expression Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, D-69126, Germany.

Oct-4 is a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in mouse
embryonic stem cells and in cell lines derived thereof. In these cells, Oct-4
activates transcription from remote binding sites due to as of yet unknown
co-activators. Expression of Oct-4 in differentiated cells is not sufficient to
activate transcription from a distance, rather it requires the co-expression of
co-activators such as the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. In this paper, we used
phage display to identify Oct-4-interacting proteins. We first analyzed the
interaction between Oct-4 and E1A in order to optimize the biochemical
conditions that enable Oct-4-specific interactions with other interacting
proteins. A panning approach was used to enrich Oct-4 interacting phages from a
pool of excess unspecific phages. The biochemical conditions established in our
interaction assays were then used to screen a P19 EC cell cDNA expression
library in M13 filamentous phage. A number of phage clones displaying portions
of unknown and known transcription factors were obtained, from which the HMG-1
transcription factor was identified. HMG-1, and the closely related factor
HMG-2, interact with Oct-4 when co-expressed in mammalian cells. In addition,
HMG-1 was found to cooperate with Oct-4 in P19 EC cells. These results provide
the first evidence of a non-viral factor that enhances Oct-4 distance-dependent
transactivation in stem cells. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11099378 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR82: Biochemistry. 2000 Nov 28;39(47):14426-35. 

Intercalating residues determine the mode of HMG1 domains A and B binding to
cisplatin-modified DNA.

He Q, Ohndorf UM, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Cisplatin exerts its anticancer activity by forming covalent adducts with DNA.
High-mobility group (HMG)-domain proteins recognize the major 1,2-intrastrand
cisplatin-DNA cross-links and can mediate cisplatin cytotoxicity. The crystal
structure of HMG1 domain A bound to cisplatin-modified DNA, further analyzed
here, reveals intercalation of a key Phe37 residue. Other published structures
of HMG domains bound to DNA, including NHP6A and HMG-D, similarly indicate amino
acid side chains intercalating into linear DNA to form a bend. To delineate the
importance of such side chain intercalations and further to explore the binding
modes of different HMG domains toward prebent DNA structures, site-directed
mutagenesis was used to generate HMG1 domain A and domain B mutants. The
affinities of these mutant proteins for cisplatin-modified DNA were determined
in gel electrophoresis mobility shift assays. The results indicate that
intercalating residues at positions 16 or 37 can both contribute to the binding
affinity. The data further reveal that the length of the loop between helices I
and II is not critical for binding affinity. Footprinting analyses indicate that
the position of the intercalating residue dictates the binding mode of the
domain toward platinated DNA. Both congruent and offset positioning of the HMG
domain with respect to the locus of the cisplatin-induced bend in the DNA were
encountered. Packing interactions in the crystal structure suggest how
full-length HMG1 might bind to DNA by contacting more than one duplex
simultaneously. Taken together, these results demonstrate that cisplatin
modification of DNA provides an energetically favorable, prebent target for HMG
domains, which bind to these targets through one or more side chain and
favorable hydrophobic surface interactions.

PMID: 11087395 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR83: FEBS Lett. 2000 Nov 17;485(1):47-52. 

The chromosomal protein HMG-D binds to the TAR and RBE RNA of HIV-1.

Arimondo PB, Gelus N, Hamy F, Payet D, Travers A, Bailly C.

Institut National de la Sante et la Recherche Medicale, Lille, France.

The high mobility group protein HMG-D is known to bind preferentially to DNA of
irregular structures with little or no sequence specificity. Upon binding to
DNA, this HMG-box protein widens the minor groove of the double helix and
induces a significant bending of the helix. We show here that HMG-D can strongly
bind to double-stranded RNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that
HMG-D100 interacts with the transactivation response region (TAR) RNA from
HIV-1. Strong interaction with a high affinity Rev protein binding element (RBE)
RNA was also characterized. Gel shift experiments performed with several TAR RNA
constructs lacking the lateral pyrimidine bulge or with modified apical loop
regions indicate that the protein does not recognize the single-strand domains
of the RNA but apparently interacts directly with the double-stranded stem
regions. No protein-RNA complexes could be detected when using single-stranded
oligoribonucleotides. HMG-D protein could bind to the wide minor groove of the
A-form TAR RNA. The comparison of the amino acid sequence of HMG-D with that of
known RNA binding proteins suggests that the interaction of the protein with a
double-stranded RNA implicates the basic region of HMG-D as well as its HMG-box
domain. From the in vitro data reported here, we propose a novel functional role
for proteins of the HMG-1 family. The results suggest that architectural HMG
proteins can be recruited by double-stranded RNA for the development of HIV-1 in
the host cell.

PMID: 11086163 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR84: J Mol Biol. 2000 Nov 24;304(2):135-49. 

The effect of the acidic tail on the DNA-binding properties of the HMG1,2 class
of proteins: insights from tail switching and tail removal.

Lee KB, Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.

The high-mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a are relatively
abundant vertebrate DNA-binding and bending proteins that bind with structure
specificity, rather than sequence specificity, and appear to play an
architectural role in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes. They have two
homologous "HMG-box" DNA-binding domains (which show about 80 % homology)
connected by a short basic linker to an acidic carboxy-terminal tail that
differs in length between HMG1 and 2. To gain insights into the role of the
acidic tail, we examined the DNA-binding properties of HMG1, HMG2b and HMG2a
from chicken erythrocytes (corresponding to HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a in other
vertebrates). HMG1, with the longest acidic tail, is less effective than HMG2a
and 2b (at a given molar input ratio) in supercoiling relaxed, closed circular
DNA, in inducing ligase-mediated circularisation of an 88 bp DNA fragment, and
in binding to four-way DNA junctions in a gel-shift assay. Removal of the acidic
tail increases the affinity of the HMG boxes for DNA and largely abolishes the
differences between the three species. Switching the acidic tail of HMG1 for
that of HMG2a or 2b gives hybrid proteins with essentially the same DNA-binding
properties as HMG2a, 2b. The length (and possibly sequence) of the acidic tail
thus appears to be the dominant factor in mediating the differences in
properties between HMG1, 2a and 2b and finely tunes the rather similar
DNA-binding properties of the tandem HMG boxes, presumably to fulfill different
cellular roles. The tail is essential for structure-selective DNA-binding of the
HMG boxes to DNA minicircles in the presence of equimolar linear DNA, and has
little effect on the affinity for this already highly distorted DNA ligand, in
contrast to binding to linear and four-way junction DNA. Copyright 2000 Academic
Press.

PMID: 11080451 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR85: J Rheumatol. 2000 Oct;27(10):2489-93. 

Relationship between sex and antibodies to high mobility group proteins 1 and 2
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Rosenberg AM, Cordeiro DM.

Department of Pediatrics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.
rosenberg@sask.usask.ca

OBJECTIVE: To compare the frequencies of antibodies to high mobility group
proteins 1 and 2 (HMG-1, HMG-2) in boys and girls with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (JIA). METHODS: Sera of 60 children (44 girls, 16 boys) with JIA were
screened for the presence of anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and antichromatin
antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) on eukaryotic cells and were
assayed further for the presence of antibodies to purified HMG-1 and HMG-2 by
enzyme immunoassays. RESULTS: A positive test for ANA was significantly
associated with the presence of antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. There was a
significant association between antibodies targeting the chromosomal regions of
metaphase cells and antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. Females were
significantly more likely than males to have ANA, and specifically more likely
to have antibodies to HMG-1. There was a significant association between the
presence of antibodies to HMG proteins and chromosomal reactivity detected by
IIF on HEp-2 cells. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that females with JIA are
more likely to be ANA positive than males and more likely than males to have
antibodies to HMG-1.

PMID: 11036848 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR86: Chem Biol. 2000 Oct;7(10):805-12. 

FR900482 class of anti-tumor drugs cross-links oncoprotein HMG I/Y to DNA in
vivo.

Beckerbauer L, Tepe JJ, Cullison J, Reeves R, Williams RM.

School of Molecular Biosciences, Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the high-mobility group, HMG I/Y, family of
chromatin oncoproteins has been implicated as a clinical diagnostic marker for
both neoplastic cellular transformation and increased metastatic potential of
several human cancers. These minor groove DNA-binding oncoproteins are thus an
attractive target for anti-tumor chemotherapy. FR900482 represents a new class
of anti-tumor agents that bind to the minor groove of DNA and exhibit greatly
reduced host toxicity compared to the structurally related mitomycin C class of
anti-tumor drugs. We report covalent cross-linking of DNA to HMG I/Y by FR900482
in vivo which represents the first example of a covalent DNA-drug-protein
cross-link with a minor groove-binding oncoprotein and a potential novel
mechanism through which these compounds exert their anti-tumor activity.
RESULTS: Using a modified chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure, fragments of
DNA that have been covalently cross-linked by FR900482 to HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo were polymerase chain reaction-amplified, isolated and characterized. The
nuclear samples from control cells were devoid of DNA fragments whereas the
nuclear samples from cells treated with FR900482 contained DNA fragments which
were cross-linked by the drug to the minor groove-binding HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo. Additional control experiments established that the drug also cross-linked
other non-oncogenic minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2) but did not
cross-link major groove-binding proteins (Elf-1 and NFkappaB) in vivo. Our
results are the first demonstration that FR900482 cross-links a number of minor
groove-binding proteins in vivo and suggests that the cross-linking of the HMG
I/Y oncoproteins may participate in the mode of efficacy as a chemotherapeutic
agent. CONCLUSIONS: We have illustrated that the FR class of anti-tumor
antibiotics, represented in this study by FR900482, is able to produce covalent
cross-links between the HMG I/Y oncoproteins and DNA in vivo. The ability of
this class of compounds to cross-link the HMG I/Y proteins in the minor groove
of DNA represents the first demonstration of drug-induced cross-linking of a
specific cancer-related protein to DNA in living cells. We have also
demonstrated that FR900482 cross-links other minor groove-binding proteins
(HMG-1 and HMG-2 in the present study) in vivo; however, since HMG I/Y is the
only minor groove-binding oncoprotein presently known, it is possible that these
non-histone chromatin proteins are among the important in vivo targets of this
family of drugs. These compounds have already been assessed as representing a
compelling clinical replacement for mitomycin C due to their greatly reduced
host toxicity and superior DNA interstrand cross-linking efficacy. The capacity
of FR900482 to cross-link the HMG I/Y oncoprotein with nuclear DNA in vivo
potentially represents a significant elucidation of the anti-tumor efficacy of
this family of anticancer agents.

PMID: 11033083 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR87: Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Oct 15;28(20):4044-50. 

DNA binding by single HMG box model proteins.

Xin H, Taudte S, Kallenbach NR, Limbach MP, Zitomer RS.

Department of Chemistry, New York University, 31 Washington Place, New York, NY
10003, USA.

The HMG1/2 family is a large group of proteins that share a conserved sequence
of approximately 80 amino acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline side chains,
referred to as an HMG box. Previous studies show that HMG boxes can bind to DNA
in a structure-specific manner. To define the basis for DNA recognition by HMG
boxes, we characterize the interaction of two model HMG boxes, one a
structure-specific box, rHMGb from the rat HMG1 protein, the other a
sequence-specific box, Rox1 from yeast, with oligodeoxynucleotide substrates.
Both proteins interact with single-stranded oligonucleotides in this study to
form 1:1 complexes. The stoichiometry of binding of rHMGb to duplex or branched
DNAs differs: for a 16mer duplex we find a weak 2:1 complex, while a 4:1
protein:DNA complex is detected with a four-way DNA junction of 16mers in the
presence of Mg(2+). In the case of the sequence-specific Rox1 protein we find
tight 1:1 and 2:1 complexes with its cognate duplex sequence and again a 4:1
complex with four-way branched DNA. If the DNA branching is reduced to three
arms, both proteins form 3:1 complexes. We believe that these multimeric
complexes are relevant for HMG1/2 proteins in vivo, since Mg(2+) is present in
the nucleus and these proteins are expressed at a very high level.

PMID: 11024186 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR88: Biochemistry. 2000 Sep 26;39(38):11771-6. 

HMG-domain protein recognition of cisplatin 1,2-intrastrand d(GpG) cross-links
in purine-rich sequence contexts.

Cohen SM, Mikata Y, He Q, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

HMG-domain proteins bind strongly to bent DNA structures, including cruciform
and cisplatin-modified duplexes. Such protein-platinated DNA complexes, formed
where the DNA is modified by the active cis but not the inactive trans isomer of
diamminedichloroplatinum(II), are implicated in the cytotoxic mechanism of the
drug. A series of oligonucleotide duplexes with deoxyguanosine nucleosides
flanking a cis-[Pt(NH(3))(2) inverted question markd(GpG)-N7(1),-N7(2) inverted
question mark] cross-link have been synthesized. These probes were used to
determine the flanking sequence dependence of the affinity of the individual HMG
domains of HMG1 toward cisplatin-modified DNA. Nine related sequences, where
N(1) and N(2) are not dG and GG is the 1,2-intrastrand cisplatin adduct in
N(1)GGN(2), were previously investigated [Dunham, S. U., and Lippard, S. J.
(1997) Biochemistry 36, 11428-11436]. Three of the seven remaining possible
sequences for which N(1) and/or N(2) was dG were prepared here by using normal
deoxyguanosine, but the rest, where N(1) is dG and N(2) is dA, dC, T, or dG,
could not be isolated in pure form. These sequences were accessed by using the
synthetic bases 7-deazaadenine and 7-deazaguanine, which lack the nucleophilic
N7 atom in the purine ring. Deaza nucleotides accurately mimic the properties of
the natural bases, allowing the interaction of the HMG-domain proteins with
cisplatin-modified DNA to be examined. These experiments reveal that the
flexibility of A.T versus G.C flanking base pairs, rather than base-specific
contacts, determines HMG1domA protein selectivity. This conclusion was supported
by use of mutant HMG1domA and HMG1domB proteins, which exhibit identical
flanking sequence selectivity. The methods and results obtained here not only
improve our understanding of how proteins might mediate cisplatin genotoxicity
but also should apply more generally in the investigation of how other proteins
interact with damaged DNA.

PMID: 10995245 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR89: J Immunol. 2000 Sep 15;165(6):2950-4. 

HMG-1 as a mediator of acute lung inflammation.

Abraham E, Arcaroli J, Carmody A, Wang H, Tracey KJ.

Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA. edward.abraham@uchsc.edu

Acute inflammatory lung injury is often a delayed complication of critical
illness and is associated with increased mortality. High mobility group-1
(HMG-1) protein, in addition to its role as a transcriptional regulatory factor,
has recently been identified as a late mediator of endotoxin lethality. In the
present studies, HMG-1 given intratracheally produced acute inflammatory injury
to the lungs, with neutrophil accumulation, the development of lung edema, and
increased pulmonary production of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and
macrophage-inflammatory protein-2. In endotoxin-induced acute lung inflammation,
administration of anti-HMG-1 Abs either before or after endotoxin exposure
decreased the migration of neutrophils to the lungs as well as lung edema. These
protective effects of anti-HMG-1 were specific, because pulmonary levels of
IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 were not decreased
after therapy with anti-HMG-1. Together, these findings indicate that HMG-1 is a
distal mediator of acute inflammatory lung injury.

PMID: 10975801 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR90: J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 17;275(46):35699-707. 

A role of basic residues and the putative intercalating phenylalanine of the
HMG-1 box B in DNA supercoiling and binding to four-way DNA junctions.

Stros M, Muselikova E.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, CZ-612 65
Brno, Czech Republic. stros@ibp.cz

HMG (high mobility group) 1 is a chromosomal protein with two homologous
DNA-binding domains, the HMG boxes A and B. HMG-1, like its individual HMG
boxes, can recognize structural distortion of DNA, such as four-way DNA
junctions (4WJs), that are very likely to have features common to their natural,
yet unknown, cellular binding targets. HMG-1 can also bend/loop DNA and
introduce negative supercoils in the presence of topoisomerase I in
topologically closed DNAs. Results of our gel shift assays demonstrate that
mutation of Arg(97) within the extended N-terminal strand of the B domain
significantly (>50-fold) decreases affinity of the HMG box for 4WJs and alters
the mode of binding without changing the structural specificity for 4WJs.
Several basic amino acids of the extended N-terminal strand (Lys(96)/Arg(97))
and helix I (Arg(110)/Lys(114)) of the B domain participate in DNA binding and
supercoiling. The putative intercalating hydrophobic Phe(103) of helix I is
important for DNA supercoiling but dispensable for binding to supercoiled DNA
and 4WJs. We conclude that the B domain of HMG-1 can tolerate substitutions of a
number of amino acid residues without abolishing the structure-specific
recognition of 4WJs, whereas mutations of most of these residues severely impair
the topoisomerase I-mediated DNA supercoiling and change the sign of
supercoiling from negative to positive.

PMID: 10962007 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR91: J Exp Med. 2000 Aug 21;192(4):565-70. 

High mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1) stimulates proinflammatory cytokine
synthesis in human monocytes.

Andersson U, Wang H, Palmblad K, Aveberger AC, Bloom O, Erlandsson-Harris H,
Janson A, Kokkola R, Zhang M, Yang H, Tracey KJ.

Department of Medicine, Rheumatology Unit, Karolinska Hospital, 17176 Stockholm,
Sweden. ulf@mbox313.swipnet.se

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is lethal to animals because it activates cytokine
release, causing septic shock and tissue injury. Early proinflammatory cytokines
(e.g., tumor necrosis factor [TNF] and interleukin [IL]-1) released within the
first few hours of endotoxemia stimulate mediator cascades that persist for days
and can lead to death. High mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1), a ubiquitous
DNA-binding protein, was recently identified as a "late" mediator of endotoxin
lethality. Anti-HMG-1 antibodies neutralized the delayed increase in serum
HMG-1, and protected against endotoxin lethality, even when passive immunization
was delayed until after the early cytokine response. Here we examined whether
HMG-1 might stimulate cytokine synthesis in human peripheral blood mononuclear
cell cultures. Addition of purified recombinant HMG-1 to human monocyte cultures
significantly stimulated the release of TNF, IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-1RA, IL-6,
IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, and MIP-1beta; but not IL-10
or IL-12. HMG-1 concentrations that activated monocytes were within the
pathological range previously observed in endotoxemic animals, and in serum
obtained from septic patients. HMG-1 failed to stimulate cytokine release in
lymphocytes, indicating that cellular stimulation was specific. Cytokine release
after HMG-1 stimulation was delayed and biphasic compared with LPS stimulation.
Computer-assisted image analysis demonstrated that peak intensity of
HMG-1-induced cellular TNF staining was comparable to that observed after
maximal stimulation with LPS. Administration of HMG-1 to Balb/c mice
significantly increased serum TNF levels in vivo. Together, these results
indicate that, like other cytokine mediators of endotoxin lethality (e.g., TNF
and IL-1), extracellular HMG-1 is a regulator of monocyte proinflammatory
cytokine synthesis.

PMID: 10952726 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR92: DNA Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;19(7):421-9. 

Comparative study of the coupling between topoisomerase I activity and
high-mobility group proteins in E. coli and mammalian cells.

Veilleux S, Caron N, Boissonneault G.

Departement de Biochimie, Faculte de Medicine, Universite de Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada.

It is now well established that the HMG box DNA-binding motif can alter the
topology of double-stranded DNA in several ways. Using the spermatid-specific
tsHMG as a model protein of the HMG-1/-2 family, we have demonstrated that its
expression in E. coli produces an increase in plasmid supercoiling density that
is likely a consequence of its ability to constrain free supercoils in vivo. As
demonstrated in vitro, stabilization of free DNA supercoils by tsHMG prevents
topoisomerase I from gaining access to the template and could represent a
mechanism for the apparent inhibition of topoisomerase I in bacteria. A similar
modulation of eukaryotic topoisomerase I activity was not detected after
expression of the tsHMG in mammalian cells. This differential response is
discussed in terms of the marked difference in DNA packaging and accessibility
of free supercoils in prokaryotic vs. eukaryotic cells.

PMID: 10945232 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR93: Exp Cell Res. 2000 Aug 25;259(1):274-83. 

Molecular cloning and analysis of a group of genes differentially expressed in
cells which overexpress the Hoxa-1 homeobox gene.

Shen J, Wu H, Gudas LJ.

Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300
York Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA.

The homeobox gene Hoxa-1 is transcriptionally regulated by retinoic acid (RA)
and encodes a transcription factor which has been shown to play important roles
in cell differentiation and embryogenesis. In order to clone and characterize
target genes of Hoxa-1, we utilized differential hybridization screening and
cDNA subtractive hybridization methods to identify genes which are
differentially expressed in F9-10, a murine F9 teratocarcinoma stem cell line
which expresses high levels of exogenous Hoxa-1, compared to F9 wild-type stem
cells, which do not express endogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA in the absence of RA.
Twenty-eight candidate genes were identified; these genes encode very diverse
proteins, including signaling molecules such as BMP-4, the enzyme superoxide
dismutase, the cell adhesion molecule cadherin-6, proteins involved in gene
transcription such as HMG-1 and SAP18, homeodomain-containing proteins Gbx-2 and
Evx-2, and cell cycle regulatory proteins such as the retinoblastoma binding
protein-2. Clone 104 encodes a novel protein; the expression of the clone 104
mRNA is also regulated in a fashion very similar to that of the exogenous Hoxa-1
gene in another F9 cell line, called F9-tet-Hoxa1-8, in which the exogenous
Hoxa-1 mRNA expression is tightly regulated by a Tet-off gene expression system.
These data strongly suggest that clone 104 is a direct downstream target of the
transcription factor Hoxa-1. The cDNA sequence of clone 104 is related to that
of human ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase T. Further characterization of
these putative Hoxa-1 target genes will aid in delineating the functions of the
Hoxa-1 protein in the differentiation processes which occur during
embryogenesis. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10942599 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR94: Cancer Lett. 2000 Sep 29;158(1):17-25. 

High mobility group 1 and 2 proteins bind preferentially to DNA that contains
bulky adducts induced by benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide and
N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene.

Lanuszewska J, Widlak P.

Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Center of Oncology,
Wybrzeze AK 15, 44-100, Gliwice, Poland.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 are abundant non-histone chromosomal
proteins that bind preferentially DNA that is bent or underwound. Previous
studies have shown that these proteins preferentially bind to DNA damaged by the
crosslinking agents cis-diammine-dichloro-platinum(II), chromium(III) and UV-C
radiation. Here we have studied the binding of HMG-1/2 proteins to a duplex
oligonucleotide damaged by benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide or
N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
Both chemicals induce monoadducts that are known to distort DNA structure. The
affinities of HMG-1/2 for DNA damaged by benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide or
N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene were similar to that for UV-irradiated DNA, which
were an order of magnitude higher than for undamaged DNA. In contrast, DNA
modified by dimethyl sulfate was not preferentially recognised by HMG-1/2.

PMID: 10940504 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR95: Biochemistry. 2000 Jul 25;39(29):8426-38. 

Stopped-flow fluorescence studies of HMG-domain protein binding to
cisplatin-modified DNA.

Jamieson ER, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

High-mobility group (HMG) domain proteins bind specifically to the major DNA
adducts formed by the anticancer drug cisplatin and can modulate the biological
response to this inorganic compound. Stopped-flow fluorescence studies were
performed to investigate the kinetics of formation and dissociation of complexes
between HMG-domain proteins and a series of 16-mer oligonucleotide probes
containing both a 1,2-intrastrand d(GpG) cisplatin cross-link and a
fluorescein-modified deoxyuridine residue. Rate constants, activation
parameters, and dissociation constants were determined for complexes formed by
HMG1 domain A and the platinated DNA probes. The sequence context of the
cisplatin adduct modulates the value of the associative rate constant for HMG1
domain A by a factor of 2-4, contributing significantly to differences in
binding affinity. The rates of association or dissociation of the protein-DNA
complex were similar for a 71 bp platinated DNA analogue. Additional kinetic
studies performed with HMG1 domain B, an F37A domain A mutant, and the
full-length HMG1 protein highlight differences in the binding properties of the
HMG domains. The stopped-flow studies demonstrate the utility of the
fluorescein-dU probe in studying protein-DNA complexes. The kinetic data will
assist in determining what role these proteins might play in the cisplatin
mechanism of action.

PMID: 10913248 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR96: J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35006-12. 

Influence of HMG-1 and adenovirus oncoprotein E1A on early stages of
transcriptional preinitiation complex assembly.

Lu W, Peterson R, Dasgupta A, Scovell WM.

Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio
43403, USA.

The TATA-binding protein (TBP) in the TFIID complex binds specifically to the
TATA-box to initiate the stepwise assembly of the preinitiation complex (PIC)
for RNA polymerase II transcription. Transcriptional activators and repressors
compete with general transcription factors at each step to influence the course
of the assembly. To investigate this process, the TBP.TATA complex was titrated
with HMG-1 and the interaction monitored by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. The titration produced a ternary HMG-1.TBP. TATA complex, which exhibits
increased mobility relative to the TBP. TATA complex. The addition of increasing
levels of TFIIB to this complex results in the formation of the TFIIB.TBP.TATA
complex. However, in the reverse titration, with very high mole ratios of HMG-1
present, TFIIB is not dissociated off and a complex is formed that contains all
factors. The simultaneous addition of E1A to a mixture of TBP and TATA; or
HMG-1, TBP, and TATA; or TFIIB, TBP, and TATA inhibits complex formation. On the
other hand, E1A added to the pre-established complexes shows a significantly
reduced capability to disrupt the complex. In add-back experiments with all
complexes, increased levels of TBP re-established the complexes, indicating that
the primary target for E1A in all complexes is TBP.

PMID: 10882737 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR97: Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jul;267(13):4088-97. 

HMG1 protein stimulates DNA end joining by promoting association of DNA
molecules via their ends.

Stros M, Cherny D, Jovin TM.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Brno, Czech
Republic. stros@ibp.cz

High mobility group (HMG) 1 protein is a highly abundant and an evolutionarily
conserved chromosomal protein with two homologous DNA-binding domains (HMG
boxes), A and B, attached by a short basic region to an acidic C-terminal tail.
The protein has been implicated in a number of fundamental biological processes
including DNA replication, transcription, recombination and repair. We
demonstrate that HMG1 is able to enhance cohesive-end and blunt-end DNA ligation
by T4 DNA ligase via its B domain. The C-terminal flanking sequence of the B
domain (seven basic residues out of approximately 18) and a number of conserved
amino-acid residues within the HMG box (mainly basic or hydrophobic) are
required for efficient stimulation of ligation. Pull-down assays, electron and
scanning force microscopy revealed that HMG1 can associate two DNA molecules via
their ends even in the absence of complementary overhangs. We propose that HMG1
protein may be involved in the rejoining of DNA breaks by different DNA ligases
due to its ability to bring DNA duplexes and their termini into a close
proximity while leaving the ends accessible for ligation.

PMID: 10866811 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR98: Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(12):4359-70. 

Mechanism for specificity by HMG-1 in enhanceosome assembly.

Ellwood KB, Yen YM, Johnson RC, Carey M.

Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California at Los Angeles
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095-1737, USA.

Assembly of enhanceosomes requires architectural proteins to facilitate the DNA
conformational changes accompanying cooperative binding of activators to a
regulatory sequence. The architectural protein HMG-1 has been proposed to bind
DNA in a sequence-independent manner, yet, paradoxically, it facilitates
specific DNA binding reactions in vitro. To investigate the mechanism of
specificity we explored the effect of HMG-1 on binding of the Epstein-Barr virus
activator ZEBRA to a natural responsive promoter in vitro. DNase I footprinting,
mutagenesis, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay reveal that HMG-1 binds
cooperatively with ZEBRA to a specific DNA sequence between two adjacent ZEBRA
recognition sites. This binding requires a strict alignment between two adjacent
ZEBRA sites and both HMG boxes of HMG-1. Our study provides the first
demonstration of sequence-dependent binding by a nonspecific HMG-box protein. We
hypothesize how a ubiquitous, nonspecific architectural protein can function in
a specific context through the use of rudimentary sequence recognition coupled
with cooperativity. The observation that an abundant architectural protein can
bind DNA cooperatively and specifically has implications towards understanding
HMG-1's role in mediating DNA transactions in a variety of enzymological
systems.

PMID: 10825199 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR99: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 23;97(11):5768-72. 

Steroid hormones induce HMG1 overexpression and sensitize breast cancer cells to
cisplatin and carboplatin.

He Q, Liang CH, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.

Cisplatin is an anticancer drug that has enjoyed remarkable success against
testicular tumors, but dose limiting side-effects have limited its application
against a broader range of cancers. Previous studies have shown that
high-mobility group (HMG) domain proteins such as HMG1 sensitize cells to
cisplatin by shielding its major DNA adducts from nucleotide excision repair.
Estrogen treatment increases HMG1 mRNA levels in breast cancer MCF-7 cells.
Herein, we describe that treatment of human cancer cells having steroid hormone
receptors with the appropriate hormone, estrogen and/or progesterone,
significantly increases the potency of cisplatin and its analogue carboplatin by
causing the overexpression of HMG1. These findings suggest that the proper
combination of these drugs, which are already approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, could have potential benefit in treating tumors such as ovarian
or breast that carry the hormone receptors.

PMID: 10811891 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR100: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Apr;20(4):915-22. 

Antisense oligodeoxynucleotide inhibition of vascular angiotensin-converting
enzyme expression attenuates neointimal formation: evidence for tissue
angiotensin-converting enzyme function.

Morishita R, Gibbons GH, Tomita N, Zhang L, Kaneda Y, Ogihara T, Dzau VJ.

Division of Gene Therapy Science, Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka
University Medical School, Suita, Japan. morishit@geriat.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

It has been proposed that vascular angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) plays an
important role in regulating vascular growth. Indeed, ACE inhibitors have been
reported to prevent neointimal formation after vascular injury in a rat carotid
artery model. However, classic pharmacological experiments cannot exclude the
potential contributions of hemodynamics and the circulating renin-angiotensin
system (RAS). In this study, we used antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) to
obtain local blockade of vascular ACE expression without effects on systemic
hemodynamics and circulating RAS. To increase the effectiveness of antisense
action, we modified the hemagglutinating virus of Japan-liposome ODN delivery
method by cotransfection with nuclear protein (high mobility group 1 [HMG-1])
and RNase H. In vitro experiments showed the enhanced efficacy of antisense ODN
by cotransfection of HMG-1 and RNase H compared with ODN alone. In vivo
transfection of antisense ACE ODNs into intact uninjured rat carotid artery
resulted in a significant reduction of vascular ACE activity, and cotransfection
of HMG-1 and RNase H showed further reduction. We examined the effects of local
blockade of vascular ACE expression on neointimal formation after vascular
injury. Transfection of antisense ACE ODNs resulted in the attenuation of
neointimal formation, whereas sense and scrambled ODNs did not. Blood pressure,
heart rate, and serum ACE activity were not affected by antisense treatment. The
magnitude of vascular ACE inhibition correlated with the suppression of the
neointimal size. Overall, this study demonstrates that local antisense ODN
inhibition of vascular ACE expression attenuates neointimal formation
independent of hemodynamics and circulating RAS. The results support the
existence of a functional tissue angiotensin system in the rat vessel wall.

PMID: 10764654 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR101: Genomics. 2000 Jan 1;63(1):117-22. 

Back to the roots of a new exon--the molecular archaeology of a SP100 splice
variant.

Rogalla P, Kazmierczak B, Flohr AM, Hauke S, Bullerdiek J.

Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen, Bremen,
Germany.

Retropseudogenes are intronless DNA sequences sharing a high degree of homology
with the cDNA of their corresponding active genes. They are thought to have
originated by reverse transcription of messenger RNA and reintegration of the
cDNA into the genome. Usually considered a type of evolutionary waste, they melt
into the background of their surrounding DNA by the loss of similarity to the
active gene or disappear from the genome by the accumulation of deletions. On
the other hand, in this paper we describe the evolutionary recycling of this
genomic waste. Recently, a splice variant of the gene encoding the nuclear
protein SP100 was identified in which the 3' part of the cDNA is replaced by an
alternative exon apparently encoding an HMG1-DNA-binding domain. We were able to
show that this HMG box is contributed by a new exon arising from an HMG1
retropseudogene that we have molecularly characterized in detail. In addition to
being found in human cells, corresponding fusion transcripts were shown in Pan
troglodytes, Gorilla gorilla, and Hylobates lar, but not in Macaca mulatta.
Genomic DNA from M. mulatta enabled us to amplify by PCR the 5' part but not the
3' part of the HMG1 retropseudogene. From our data we thus can date the
underlying retrotransposition to more than 35 million years ago. Our findings
offer a model as to how new exons may evolve during evolution. To our knowledge
this is the first example of a retropseudogene becoming part of an active gene
in which both parental parts are well characterized and remain in-frame with
their cDNA.

PMID: 10766566 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR102: J Biol Chem. 2000 May 26;275(21):15789-98. 

Sequence specificity, conformation, and recognition by HMG1 protein of major DNA
interstrand cross-links of antitumor dinuclear platinum complexes.

Kasparkova J, Farrell N, Brabec V.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, CZ-61265
Brno, Czech Republic.

Interactions of high mobility group (HMG) domain proteins with DNA modified by
cisplatin plays a role in mechanisms underlying its antitumor activity. A
structural motif recognized by HMG domain proteins on cisplatin-modified DNA is
a stable, directional bend of the helix axis. In the present work, bending
induced in DNA by major adducts of a novel class of antitumor compounds,
represented by the formula [ inverted question marktrans-PtCl(NH(3))(2) inverted
question markH(2)N(CH(2))(2-6)NH(2)]Cl(2), was investigated. The
oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes containing various site-specific interstrand
cross-links of these bifunctional dinuclear platinum drugs were purified and
characterized by Maxam-Gilbert footprinting, chemical probing, and phasing
assay. It was demonstrated that the cross-links of the dinuclear compounds bent
the helix much less than those of cisplatin. Gel retardation assay revealed very
weak recognition of DNA adducts of dinuclear complexes by HMG1 protein. Hence,
the mediation of antitumor properties of dinuclear platinum complexes by HMG
domain proteins is unlikely so that polynuclear platinum compounds may represent
a novel class of platinum anticancer drugs acting by a different mechanism than
cisplatin and its analogues. A further understanding of how polynuclear platinum
compounds modify DNA and how these modifications are processed in cells should
provide a rational basis for the design of new platinum drugs rather than
searching for cisplatin analogues.

PMID: 10747955 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR103: Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 21;39(11):3052-60. 

Determining the DNA bending angle induced by non-specific high mobility group-1
(HMG-1) proteins: a novel method.

Tang L, Li J, Katz DS, Feng JA.

Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

To study the DNA bending induced by non-sequence-specific HMG-1 domain proteins,
we have engineered a fusion protein linking the yeast NHP6A with a
sequence-specific DNA binding domain, the DNA binding domain of the Hin
recombinase, Hin-DBD. A series of biochemical experiments were carried out to
characterize the DNA binding property of this fusion protein. Our data showed
that the fusion protein not only specifically recognizes a DNA fragment
containing the Hin-DBD binding site, but also binds DNA with a higher affinity
in comparison with either domain alone. Both domains of the fusion protein are
bound to the DNA in juxtaposition. Permutation assays showed that the fusion
protein induced a DNA bending at the site of NHP6A binding by an estimated value
of 63 degrees. We believe that this experimental design provides an effective
vehicle to determine the DNA bending induced by nonspecific HMG-1 proteins.

PMID: 10715126 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR104: Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 1;28(7):1618-24. 

Kinetic analysis of high-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y binding to
cholesterol-tagged DNA on a supported lipid monolayer.

Webster CI, Cooper MA, Packman LC, Williams DH, Gray JC.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, University of Cambridge, UK.

High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind to multiple sites within a
268 bp A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene ( PetE ). Within a
31 bp region of the enhancer, the binding site for HMG-1 overlaps with the
binding site for HMG-I/Y. The kinetics of binding and the affinities of HMG-1
and HMG-I/Y for the 31 bp DNA were determined using surface plasmon resonance.
Due to very high non-specific interactions of the HMG proteins with a
carboxymethyl-dextran matrix, a novel method using a cholesterol tag to anchor
the DNA in a supported lipid monolayer on a thin gold film was devised. The
phosphatidylcholine monolayer produced a surface that reduced background
interactions to a minimum and permitted the measurement of highly reproducible
protein-DNA interactions. The association rate constant ( k (a)) of HMG-I/Y with
the 31 bp DNA was approximately 5-fold higher than the rate constant for HMG-1,
whereas the dissociation constant ( K (D)) for HMG-I/Y (3.1 nM) was
approximately 7-fold lower than that for HMG-1 (20.1 nM). This suggests that
HMG-I/Y should bind preferentially at the overlapping binding site within this
region of the PetE enhancer.

PMID: 10710428 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR105: J Cell Sci. 2000 Feb;113 ( Pt 4):611-20. 

Regulation of cell migration by amphoterin.

Fages C, Nolo R, Huttunen HJ, Eskelinen E, Rauvala H.

Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Biotechnology, Division of
Biochemistry, Department of Biosciences, Viikinkaari 5, FIN-00014 University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Amphoterin, a major form of HMG (high mobility group) 1 proteins, is highly
expressed in immature and malignant cells. A role in cell motility is suggested
by the ability of amphoterin to promote neurite extension through RAGE (receptor
of advanced glycation end products), an immunoglobulin superfamily member that
communicates with the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac. We show here that cell contact with
the laminin matrix induces accumulation of both amphoterin mRNA and protein
close to the plasma membrane, which is accompanied by extracellular export of
amphoterin. A role for amphoterin in extracellular matrix-dependent cell
regulation is further suggested by the finding that specific decrease of
amphoterin mRNA and protein, using antisense oligonucleotides transfected into
cells, inhibits cell migration to laminin in a transfilter assay whereas the
oligonucleotides in the culture medium have no effect. Moreover,
affinity-purified anti-amphoterin antibodies inhibit cell migration to laminin,
supporting an extracellular role for the endogenous amphoterin in cell motility.
The finding that amphoterin expression is more pronounced in cells with a motile
phenotype as compared to cells of dense cultures, is consistent with the results
of the cell migration assays. Our results strongly suggest that amphoterin is a
key player in the migration of immature and transformed cells.

PMID: 10652254 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR106: J Inorg Biochem. 1999 Oct;77(1-2):83-7. 

Interactions of mammalian proteins with cisplatin-damaged DNA.

Turchi JJ, Henkels KM, Hermanson IL, Patrick SM.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University School
of Medicine, Dayton, OH 45435, USA. john.turchi@wright.edu

We have undertaken the systematic isolation and characterization of mammalian
proteins which display an affinity for cisplatin-damaged DNA. Fractionation of
human cell extracts has led to the identification of two classes of proteins.
The first includes proteins that bind duplex DNA in the absence of cisplatin
damage and retain their affinity for DNA in the presence of cisplatin-DNA
adducts. The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) falls into this class. The
inhibition of DNA-PK phosphorylation activity by cisplatin-damaged DNA has led
to the hypothesis that cisplatin sensitization of mammalian cells to ionizing
radiation may be mediated by DNA-PK. The second class of proteins identified are
those which display a high relative affinity for cisplatin-damaged DNA and a low
affinity for undamaged duplex DNA. Proteins that fall into this class include
high mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1), replication protein A (RPA) and xeroderma
pigmentosum group A protein (XPA). Each protein has been isolated and purified
in the lab. The interaction of each protein with cisplatin-damaged DNA has been
assessed in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. A series of DNA binding
experiments suggests that RPA binds duplex DNA via denaturation and subsequent
preferential binding to the undamaged DNA strand of the partial duplex. DNA
substrates prepared with photo-reactive base analogs on either the damaged or
undamaged DNA strand have also been employed to investigate the mechanism and
specific protein-DNA interactions that occur as each protein binds to
cisplatin-damaged DNA. Results suggest both damage and strand specificity for
RPA and XPA binding cisplatin-damaged DNA.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 10626358 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR107: J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 26;294(2):373-87. 

Structure-specific binding of the two tandem HMG boxes of HMG1 to four-way
junction DNA is mediated by the A domain.

Webb M, Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.

We have investigated the nature of the "structure-specific" binding of the
tandem A and B HMG boxes of high mobility group protein 1 (HMG1) to four-way
junction DNA. AB didomain binding favours the open, planar form of the junction,
as shown by reaction with potassium permanganate. Site-directed cleavage of the
DNA by a 1, 10-phenanthroline-copper moiety attached to unique natural or
engineered cysteine residues in the A or B domain shows that the two linked HMG
boxes are not functionally equivalent in four-way junction binding. The A domain
of the didomain binds to the centre of the junction, mediating
structure-specific binding; the concave surface of the domain interacts with the
widened minor groove at the centre, contacting one of the four strands of the
junction, and the short arm comprising helices I and II and the connecting loop
protrudes into the central hole. The B domain makes contacts along one of the
arms, presumably stabilising the binding of the didomain through additional
non-sequence-specific interactions. The isolated B domain can, however, bind to
the centre of the junction. The preferential binding of the A domain of the AB
didomain to the centre correlates with our previous finding of a higher
preference of the isolated A domain than of the B domain for this structurally
distinct DNA ligand. It is probably at least partly due to the higher positive
surface potential in the DNA-binding region of the A domain (in particular to an
array of positively charged side-chains suitably positioned to interact with the
negatively charged phosphates surrounding the central hole of the junction) and
partly to differences in residues corresponding to those that intercalate
between bases in other HMG box/DNA complexes. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10610765 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR108: Clin Immunol. 2000 Jan;94(1):42-50. 

Mast cell and neuroendocrine cytoplasmic autoantigen(s) detected by monoclonal
pANCA antibodies.

Gordon LK, Eggena M, Targan SR, Braun J.

Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

pANCA is a marker antibody expressed in most patients with ulcerative colitis,
and its cognate antigen is potentially an immunologic target in this disease.
This study evaluates whether pANCA detects an autoantigen that is expressed in
the colonic mucosa. Immunohistochemistry of colon specimens with human pANCA
monoclonal antibodies (Fab 5-2 and 5-3) revealed a minor population of
immunoreactive mucosal cells bearing a cytoplasmic vesicle antigen. By
distribution, morphology, and tryptase expression, these were identified as mast
cells. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed similar immunoreactivity of mouse
mast cell lines and human KU812. Western analysis of mouse mast cell lines
revealed immunoreactive proteins, and these were distinct from previously
proposed pANCA antigens (histone H1, HMG 1 and 2, and neutrophil vesicle
antigens). Cognate antigen for Fab 5-2 and 5-3 was also expressed in other
tissue mast cells, cerebellar neurons, and pancreatic islet cells. These
findings identify a novel cytoplasmic autoantigen(s) associated with UC by its
presence in colonic mucosa and recognition by a disease-associated marker
antibody. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10607489 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR109: Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 15;28(2):454-62. 

HMG boxes of DSP1 protein interact with the rel homology domain of transcription
factors.

Decoville M, Giraud-Panis MJ, Mosrin-Huaman C, Leng M, Locker D.

Centre de Biophysique Moleculaire, CNRS, conventionne avec l'Universite
d'Orleans, rue Charles Sadron, 45071 Orleans cedex 2, France.
decovil@cnrs-orleans.fr

Formation of the dorsoventral axis in Drosophila melanogaster is mediated
through control of the expression of several genes by the morphogen Dorsal. In
the ventral part of the embryo Dorsal activates twist and represses zen amongst
others. Recently, several proteins have been shown to assist Dorsal in the
repression of zen, one of which is DSP1, a HMG box protein that was isolated as
a putative co-repressor of Dorsal. In this report we used a DSP1 null mutant to
ascertain in vivo the involvement of DSP1 in Dorsal-mediated repression of zen
but not in the activation of twist. We show that Dorsal has the ability to
interact with DSP1 in vitro as well as with rat HMG1. Using truncated versions
of the proteins we located the domains of interaction as being the HMG boxes for
DSP1 and HMG1 and the Rel domain for Dorsal. Finally, studies of the zen DNA
binding properties of Dorsal and another related Rel protein (Gambif1 from
Anopheles gambiae) revealed that their DNA binding affinities were increased in
the presence of DSP1 and HMG1.

PMID: 10606643 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR110: J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 19;294(1):79-91. 

The recognition of distorted DNA structures by HMG-D: a footprinting and
molecular modelling study.

Payet D, Hillisch A, Lowe N, Diekmann S, Travers A.

Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Hills Road,
Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.

The high mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA binding motif found in some
eukaryotic chromosomal proteins and transcription factors. This domain binds in
the minor groove of DNA inducing a sharp bend and also preferentially binds to
certain distorted DNA structures. Although structures of sequence-specific HMG
domains with their cognate double-helical DNA binding sites have been solved,
the nature of the interaction of the domain with distorted DNA remains to be
established. In this study we have investigated the interaction of HMG-D, a
Drosophila counterpart of the vertebrate HMG1, with a DNA oligomer containing a
bulge of two adenine residues. We show by footprinting that HMG-D binds
preferentially on one side of the bulged DNA. Based on these data and on the
published NMR structures of the HMG domain of HMG-D and the LEF-1-DNA complex,
we modelled the HMG-D - bulged DNA complex. This model predicts that two
residues, Val32 and Thr33, in the loop between alpha-helices I and II are
inserted deep into the "hole" in the DNA formed by the two missing bases on one
strand of the DNA bulge. Mutation of these residues confirmed that both are
required for the efficient binding and bending of DNA by HMG-D. We discuss both
the role of this loop in the recognition of distorted DNA structures by
non-sequence specific HMG domain proteins and that of the basic tail in
stabilising the induced DNA bend. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10556030 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR111: Biochemistry. 1999 Sep 14;38(37):12150-8. 

DNA bending induced by high mobility group proteins studied by fluorescence
resonance energy transfer.

Lorenz M, Hillisch A, Payet D, Buttinelli M, Travers A, Diekmann S.

Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany.

The HMG domains of the chromosomal high mobility group proteins homologous to
the vertebrate HMG1 and HMG2 proteins preferentially recognize distorted DNA
structures. DNA binding also induces a substantial bend. Using fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET), we have determined the changes in the
end-to-end distance consequent on the binding of selected insect counterparts of
HMG1 to two DNA fragments, one of 18 bp containing a single dA(2) bulge and a
second of 27 bp with two dA(2) bulges. The observed changes are consistent with
overall bend angles for the complex of the single HMG domain with one bulge and
of two domains with two bulges of approximately 90-100 degrees and approximately
180-200 degrees, respectively. The former value contrasts with an inferred value
of 150 degrees reported by Heyduk et al. (1) for the bend induced by a single
domain. We also observe that the induced bend angle is unaffected by the
presence of the C-terminal acidic region. The DNA bend of approximately 95
degrees observed in the HMG domain complexes is similar in magnitude to that
induced by the TATA-binding protein (80 degrees), each monomeric unit of the
integration host factor (80 degrees), and the LEF-1 HMG domain (107 degrees). We
suggest this value may represent a steric limitation on the extent of DNA
bending induced by a single DNA-binding motif.

PMID: 10508419 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR112: Steroids. 1999 Sep;64(9):576-86. 

Coregulatory proteins in steroid hormone receptor action: the role of chromatin
high mobility group proteins HMG-1 and -2.

Melvin VS, Edwards DP.

University of Colorado School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Denver
80262, USA.

To directly activate specific gene expression, the progesterone receptor must
bind to specific hormone response elements in target promoters. We have
previously reported that progesterone receptor requires a nuclear factor, high
mobility group 1 or 2 (HMG-1/-2) for high-affinity interaction with DNA in vitro
and for full transcriptional activity in vivo. We have also observed that
HMG-1/-2 selectively influences the activity of the steroid hormone class of
nuclear receptors but does not affect other classes of nuclear receptors. This
report is a summary of our published and unpublished studies to determine the
effects of HMG-1/-2 on a broad range of nuclear receptor supergene family
members and to define the mechanism for the specific effect of HMG-1/-2 on the
steroid class of receptors. Our studies and available structural data suggest a
model where the DNA binding domains of nonsteroid nuclear receptors contain a
minor groove DNA interface, termed the C-terminal extension, that contributes to
high-affinity DNA binding. Steroid receptors lack such a minor groove interface
and therefore require an additional protein, HMG-1/-2, that functionally
substitutes for the C-terminal extension to facilitate high-affinity
interactions with DNA.

PMID: 10503712 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR113: Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):6532-42. 

The RAG1 homeodomain recruits HMG1 and HMG2 to facilitate recombination signal
sequence binding and to enhance the intrinsic DNA-bending activity of RAG1-RAG2.

Aidinis V, Bonaldi T, Beltrame M, Santagata S, Bianchi ME, Spanopoulou E.

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

V(D)J recombination is initiated by the specific binding of the RAG1-RAG2
(RAG1/2) complex to the heptamer-nonamer recombination signal sequences (RSS).
Several steps of the V(D)J recombination reaction can be reconstituted in vitro
with only RAG1/2 plus the high-mobility-group protein HMG1 or HMG2. Here we show
that the RAG1 homeodomain directly interacts with both HMG boxes of HMG1 and
HMG2 (HMG1,2). This interaction facilitates the binding of RAG1/2 to the RSS,
mainly by promoting high-affinity binding to the nonamer motif. Using
circular-permutation assays, we found that the RAG1/2 complex bends the RSS DNA
between the heptamer and nonamer motifs. HMG1,2 significantly enhance the
binding and bending of the 23RSS but are not essential for the formation of a
bent DNA intermediate on the 12RSS. A transient increase of HMG1,2 concentration
in transfected cells increases the production of the final V(D)J recombinants in
vivo.

PMID: 10490593 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR114: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Sep 14;96(19):10679-83. 

Interactions between an HMG-1 protein and members of the Rel family.

Brickman JM, Adam M, Ptashne M.

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

We show that the Drosophila protein DSP1, an HMG-1/2-like protein, binds DNA
highly cooperatively with three members of the Rel family of transcriptional
regulators (NF-kappaB, the p50 subunit of NF-kappaB, and the Rel domain of
Dorsal). This cooperativity is apparent with DNA molecules bearing consensus
Rel-protein-binding sites and is unaffected by the presence of a negative
regulatory element, a sequence previously proposed to be important for mediating
repression by these Rel proteins. The cooperativity observed in these
DNA-binding assays is paralleled by interactions between protein pairs in the
absence of DNA. We also show that in HeLa cells, as assayed by transient
transfection, expression of DSP1 increases activation by Dorsal from the twist
promoter and inhibits that activation from the zen promoter, consistent with the
previously proposed idea that DSP1 can affect the action of Dorsal in a
promoter-specific fashion.

PMID: 10485885 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR115: J Biol Inorg Chem. 1999 Aug;4(4):402-11. 

Toxicity of platinum(II) amino acid (N,O) complexes parallels their binding to
DNA as measured in a new solid phase assay involving a fluorescent HMG1 protein
construct readout.

Ziegler CJ, Sandman KE, Liang CH, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

The compound [Pt(lysine)Cl2] (Kplatin) was previously identified in a study of
platinum amino acid complexes as a potential antitumor drug candidate. The DNA
binding properties, high mobility group (HMG)-domain protein affinity for the
platinated DNA, and cytotoxicity against HeLa cells of Kplatin and three related
(N,O) chelated platinum(II) amino acid complexes, [Pt(arginine)Cl2] (Rplatin),
K[Pt(Nepsilon-acetyllysine)Cl2] (NacKplatin), and K[Pt(norleucine)Cl2]
(Norplatin), are reported. The four complexes have identical PtCl2(N,O)
coordination environments. A new solid phase screening methodology was devised
in which platinated DNA probes are covalently attached to a nylon support and
tested for their ability to bind a fluorescently labeled HMG-domain protein. The
fluorescent HMG-domain protein was generated by expressing a fusion of the green
fluorescent protein (GFP) with recombinant rat HMG1. Binding revealed by the
solid phase method correlated well with the results of gel mobility shift and
HeLa cytotoxicity assays. These results suggest that the net charge on the
complex, rather than the nature of the side chain, is the most important factor
underlying the DNA binding properties and toxicity of amino acid (N,O) chelated
platinum complexes. This property explains why Kplatin was previously selected
from the pool of platinum amino acid complexes based on the ability of its DNA
adducts to bind HMG1.

PMID: 10555574 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR116: Surgery. 1999 Aug;126(2):389-92. 

Proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1) stimulate
release of high mobility group protein-1 by pituicytes.

Wang H, Vishnubhakat JM, Bloom O, Zhang M, Ombrellino M, Sama A, Tracey KJ.

Department of Emergency Medicine, North Shore University Hospital-New York
University School of Medicine, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cytokines mediate the metabolic and physiologic responses to injury
and infection. Anterior pituitary cells express receptors for tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) and interleukin 1 (IL-1), which can signal these cells to release
corticotropin, growth hormone, and cytokines such as IL-1 and macrophage
migration inhibitory factor. This interaction provides an important link between
the immune system and the neuroendocrine system. We reasoned that pituicytes
activated with TNF or IL-1 might release previously unrecognized factors that
could participate in this signaling from the neuroendocrine to the immune
system. METHODS: Proteins released from rat pituicytes (GH3) after stimulation
with proinflammatory cytokines were identified by N-terminal amino acid
sequencing. Polyclonal antibodies against a peptide corresponding to the
N-terminal amino acid sequence were generated and used to determine the kinetics
of protein release. RESULTS: Cytokine stimulation induced the release of a 30-kd
protein from rat pituicytes. After the protein was isolated and the N-terminal
amino acid sequence determined, a protein database analysis revealed that it is
high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein. TNF and IL-1 induced the release of HMG-1
from pituicytes in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Interferon gamma alone did
not induce the release of HMG-1, but it enhanced TNF-induced HMG-1 release.
CONCLUSION: Stimulation of pituicytes by TNF or IL-1 induces the release of
HMG-1, which may participate in the regulation of neuroendocrine and immune
responses to infection or injury.

PMID: 10455911 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR117: Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Mar;24(3):290-2. 

HMG1 is not rearranged by 13q12 aberrations in lipomas.

Kazmierczak B, Dal Cin P, Meyer-Bolte K, Van den Berghe H, Bullerdiek J.

Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen, Germany.

Several cytogenetic subgroups with characteristic lesions involving chromosomal
regions 12q14-15, 6p21.3, or 13q12 can be distinguished in lipomas.
Rearrangements of the HMGIC gene have been described in cases with 12q14-15
abnormalities, whereas HMGIY has been shown to be the target gene of 6p21.3
aberrations. Recently, HMG1, another member of the HMG family, was mapped to
13q12. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible role of HMG1
aberrations in lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities. Two PAC clones containing HMG1
were isolated. By molecular cytogenetic investigations using these PAC clones
and by Southern blot analysis of eight lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities, we were
able to show that these chromosomal rearrangements did not result in intragenic
rearrangements of HMG1 or breakpoints close to it.

PMID: 10451712 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR118: Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 22;261(1):113-7. 

High mobility group-like protein in bovine milk stimulates the proliferation of
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells.

Yamamura J, Takada Y, Goto M, Kumegawa M, Aoe S.

Nutritional Science Laboratory, Snow Brand Milk Products Co., Ltd., 1-1-2
Minamidai, Saitama, Kawagoe, 350-1165, Japan.

The active component in bovine milk on the proliferation of osteoblastic
MC3T3-E1 cells was purified and identified. Growth-promoting activity was
measured by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation on the cell. The molecular weight of
the purified protein was 10 kDa. The amino-terminal sequence of this 10-kDa
protein was identical to bovine high mobility group protein (HMG) 1. This 10-kDa
protein is suggested to be a basic protein and to have an HMG box, a consensus
sequence motif among the HMG family. From these results, we named this protein
HMG-like protein. HMG is a ubiquitous nonhistone component of chromatin and
considered to be implicated in DNA replication. We found this protein in milk,
and it showed a growth-promoting activity. We propose the possibility that
HMG-like protein existed in milk and plays an important role for neonate in bone
formation by activating osteoblasts. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10405332 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR119: J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 16;274(29):20116-22. 

Constitutive phosphorylation of the acidic tails of the high mobility group 1
proteins by casein kinase II alters their conformation, stability, and DNA
binding specificity.

Wisniewski JR, Szewczuk Z, Petry I, Schwanbeck R, Renner U.

III. Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universitat Gottingen,
Humboldtallee 34A, D-37073 Gottingen, Germany. jwisnie@gwdg.de

The high mobility group (HMG) 1 and 2 proteins are the most abundant non-histone
components of chromosomes. Here, we report that essentially the entire pool of
HMG1 proteins in Drosophila embryos and Chironomus cultured cells is
phosphorylated at multiple serine residues located within acidic tails of these
proteins. The phosphorylation sites match the consensus phosphorylation site of
casein kinase II. Electrospray ionization mass spectroscopic analyses revealed
that Drosophila HMGD and Chironomus HMG1a and HMG1b are double-phosphorylated
and that Drosophila HMGZ is triple-phosphorylated. The importance of this
post-translational modification was studied by comparing some properties of the
native and in vitro dephosphorylated proteins. It was found that
dephosphorylation affects the conformation of the proteins and decreases their
conformational and metabolic stability. Moreover, it weakens binding of the
proteins to four-way junction DNA by 2 orders of magnitude, whereas the strength
of binding to linear DNA remains unchanged. Based on these observations, we
propose that the detected phosphorylation is important for the proper function
and turnover rates of these proteins. As the occurrence of acidic tails
containing canonical casein kinase II phosphorylation sites is common to diverse
HMG and other chromosomal proteins, our results are probably of general
significance.

PMID: 10400623 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR120: Science. 1999 Jul 9;285(5425):248-51. 

HMG-1 as a late mediator of endotoxin lethality in mice.

Wang H, Bloom O, Zhang M, Vishnubhakat JM, Ombrellino M, Che J, Frazier A, Yang
H, Ivanova S, Borovikova L, Manogue KR, Faist E, Abraham E, Andersson J,
Andersson U, Molina PE, Abumrad NN, Sama A, Tracey KJ.

Department of Emergency Medicine and Department of Surgery, North Shore
University Hospital-New York University School of Medicine, Manhasset, NY 11030,
USA. hwang@picower.edu

Endotoxin, a constituent of Gram-negative bacteria, stimulates macrophages to
release large quantities of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1
(IL-1), which can precipitate tissue injury and lethal shock (endotoxemia).
Antagonists of TNF and IL-1 have shown limited efficacy in clinical trials,
possibly because these cytokines are early mediators in pathogenesis. Here a
potential late mediator of lethality is identified and characterized in a mouse
model. High mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein was found to be released by
cultured macrophages more than 8 hours after stimulation with endotoxin, TNF, or
IL-1. Mice showed increased serum levels of HMG-1 from 8 to 32 hours after
endotoxin exposure. Delayed administration of antibodies to HMG-1 attenuated
endotoxin lethality in mice, and administration of HMG-1 itself was lethal.
Septic patients who succumbed to infection had increased serum HMG-1 levels,
suggesting that this protein warrants investigation as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 10398600 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR121: EMBO J. 1999 Jul 1;18(13):3712-23. 

Nucleosome structure completely inhibits in vitro cleavage by the V(D)J
recombinase.

Golding A, Chandler S, Ballestar E, Wolffe AP, Schlissel MS.

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Department
of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 1068 Ross Building, 720 Rutland Avenue,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Lineage specificity and temporal ordering of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell
receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement are reflected in the accessibility of
recombination signal sequences (RSSs) within chromatin to in vitro cleavage by
the V(D)J recombinase. In this report, we investigated the basis of this
regulation by testing the ability of purified RAG1 and RAG2 proteins to initiate
cleavage on positioned nucleosomes containing RSS substrates. We found that
nicking and double-strand DNA cleavage of RSSs positioned on the face of an
unmodified nucleosome are entirely inhibited. This inhibition was independent of
translational position or rotational phase and could not be overcome either by
addition of the DNA-bending protein HMG-1 or by the use of hyperacetylated
histones. We suggest that the nucleosome could act as the stable unit of
chromatin which limits recombinase accessibility to potential RSS targets, and
that actively rearranging gene segments might be packaged in a modified or
disrupted nucleosome structure.

PMID: 10393186 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR122: Nature. 1999 Jun 17;399(6737):708-12. 

Basis for recognition of cisplatin-modified DNA by high-mobility-group proteins.

Ohndorf UM, Rould MA, He Q, Pabo CO, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

The anticancer activity of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin) arises
from its ability to damage DNA, with the major adducts formed being intrastrand
d(GpG) and d(ApG) crosslinks. These crosslinks bend and unwind the duplex, and
the altered structure attracts high-mobility-group domain (HMG) and other
proteins. This binding of HMG-domain proteins to cisplatin-modified DNA has been
postulated to mediate the antitumour properties of the drug. Many HMG-domain
proteins recognize altered DNA structures such as four-way junctions and
cisplatin-modified DNA, but until now the molecular basis for this recognition
was unknown. Here we describe mutagenesis, hydroxyl-radical footprinting and
X-ray studies that elucidate the structure of a 1:1 cisplatin-modified
DNA/HMG-domain complex. Domain A of the structure-specific HMG-domain protein
HMG1 binds to the widened minor groove of a 16-base-pair DNA duplex containing a
site-specific cis-[Pt(NH3)2[d(GpG)-N7(1),-N7(2)]] adduct. The DNA is strongly
kinked at a hydrophobic notch created at the platinum-DNA crosslink and protein
binding extends exclusively to the 3' side of the platinated strand. A
phenylalanine residue at position 37 intercalates into a hydrophobic notch
created at the platinum crosslinked d(GpG) site and binding of the domain is
dramatically reduced in a mutant in which alanine is substituted for
phenylalanine at this position.

PMID: 10385126 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR123: Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jun 15;1432(1):1-12. 

Reexamination of the high mobility group-1 protein for self-association and
characterization of hydrodynamic properties.

Ranatunga W, Lebowitz J, Axe B, Pavlik P, Kar SR, Scovell WM.

Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, OH
43403, USA.

Previous studies of the 25 kDa high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein have
generated conflicting results regarding whether HMG-1 exists as a monomer or is
capable of oligomerizing to (functional) tetramers. To resolve this question,
sedimentation velocity analysis yielded a s20,w value of 2.59S, which is
consistent with a monomeric protein. Equilibrium sedimentation data were
obtained for three HMG-1 concentrations at two rotor speeds. The six sets of
data were fit to both an ideal single component and monomer-dimer equilibrium
model, with essentially identical fits produced for both models, with the latter
indicating a low extent (7%) of dimerization. Reaction of HMG-1 with
glutaraldehyde produced a small population of oligomers consistent with a low
level of dimers. This supported the monomer-dimer equilibrium model.
Surprisingly, gel permeation chromatography yielded an apparent molecular mass
of approx. 55 kDa for both HMG-1 and HMG-2. This finding is considered anomalous
and presumably due to the high negative charge density in the C terminus of
HMG-1. The sedimentation data also permit one to model HMG-1 as a hydrated
prolate ellipsoid with a major axis/minor axis ratio of 2. 79. The collective
evidence from the sedimentation and chemical cross-linking studies strongly
supports a moderately asymmetric monomer in solution and unequivocally
eliminates the possibility of a highly extended shape for HMG-1 or the existence
of any extensive oligomerization.

PMID: 10366723 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR124: J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16536-44. 

The HMG-I(Y) A.T-hook peptide motif confers DNA-binding specificity to a
structured chimeric protein.

Banks GC, Mohr B, Reeves R.

Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4660, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving genes coding for members of the HMG-I(Y)
family of "high mobility group" non-histone chromatin proteins (HMG-I, HMG-Y,
and HMG-IC) have been observed in numerous types of human tumors. Many of these
gene rearrangements result in the creation of chimeric proteins in which the
DNA-binding domains of the HMG-I(Y) proteins, the so-called A.T-hook motifs,
have been fused to heterologous peptide sequences. Although little is known
about either the structure or biophysical properties of these naturally
occurring fusion proteins, the suggestion has been made that such chimeras have
probably assumed an altered in vivo DNA-binding specificity due to the presence
of the A.T-hook motifs. To investigate this possibility, we performed in vitro
"domain-swap" experiments using a model protein fusion system in which a single
A. T-hook peptide was exchanged for a corresponding length peptide in the well
characterized "B-box" DNA-binding domain of the HMG-1 non-histone chromatin
protein. Here we report that chimeric A. T-hook/B-box hybrids exhibit in vitro
DNA-binding characteristics resembling those of wild type HMG-I(Y) protein,
rather than the HMG-1 protein. These results strongly suggest that the chimeric
fusion proteins produced in human tumors as a result of HMG-I(Y) gene
chromosomal translocations also retain A.T-hook-imparted DNA-binding properties
in vivo.

PMID: 10347218 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



DR125: Gut. 1999 Jun;44(6):867-73. 

Comment in:
    Gut. 1999 Jun;44(6):776-7.

High mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 are
significant target antigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies in autoimmune hepatitis.

Sobajima J, Ozaki S, Uesugi H, Osakada F, Inoue M, Fukuda Y, Shirakawa H,
Yoshida M, Rokuhara A, Imai H, Kiyosawa K, Nakao K.

Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

BACKGROUND: High mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and
HMG2 have been identified as novel antigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCAs), and the existence of anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2
antibodies in a population of patients with ulcerative colitis has been
reported. AIMS: To investigate whether HMG1 and HMG2 are target antigens for
p-ANCAs in autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). PATIENTS: Serum samples from 28 patients
with AIH, 44 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), 27 patients with
chronic hepatitis C, and 23 patients with chronic hepatitis B were tested.
METHODS: ANCAs were detected by routine indirect immunofluorescence (IIF).
Anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2 antibodies were assayed by enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay. RESULTS: p-ANCAs were detected in 89% (25/28) of patients with AIH, 36%
(16/44) of patients with PBC, 11% (3/27) of patients with chronic hepatitis C,
and 13% (3/23) of patients with chronic hepatitis B. Anti-HMG1 and/or anti-HMG2
antibodies were detected in 89% (25/28) of patients with AIH, 70% (31/44) with
PBC, 26% (7/27) with chronic hepatitis C, and 9% (2/23) with chronic hepatitis
B. In AIH, anti-HMG1 and/or anti-HMG2 antibodies were detected in 96% (24/25) of
p-ANCA positive patients. The p-ANCA staining pattern detected by IIF using sera
from patients with AIH disappeared or decreased in titre after preincubation
with a mixture of HMG1/HMG2. The presence and titres of those antibodies in AIH
correlated significantly with those of p-ANCA, but not with those of
anti-nuclear antibody or anti-smooth muscle antibody. CONCLUSIONS: HMG1 and HMG2
are significant target antigens of p-ANCA in AIH.

PMID: 10323891 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR126: EMBO J. 1999 May 4;18(9):2563-79. 

Solution structure of the HMG protein NHP6A and its interaction with DNA reveals
the structural determinants for non-sequence-specific binding.

Allain FH, Yen YM, Masse JE, Schultze P, Dieckmann T, Johnson RC, Feigon J.

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA.

NHP6A is a chromatin-associated protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae belonging
to the HMG1/2 family of non-specific DNA binding proteins. NHP6A has only one
HMG DNA binding domain and forms relatively stable complexes with DNA. We have
determined the solution structure of NHP6A and constructed an NMR-based model
structure of the DNA complex. The free NHP6A folds into an L-shaped three
alpha-helix structure, and contains an unstructured 17 amino acid basic tail
N-terminal to the HMG box. Intermolecular NOEs assigned between NHP6A and a 15
bp 13C,15N-labeled DNA duplex containing the SRY recognition sequence have
positioned the NHP6A HMG domain onto the minor groove of the DNA at a site that
is shifted by 1 bp and in reverse orientation from that found in the SRY-DNA
complex. In the model structure of the NHP6A-DNA complex, the N-terminal basic
tail is wrapped around the major groove in a manner mimicking the C-terminal
tail of LEF1. The DNA in the complex is severely distorted and contains two
adjacent kinks where side chains of methionine and phenylalanine that are
important for bending are inserted. The NHP6A-DNA model structure provides
insight into how this class of architectural DNA binding proteins may select
preferential binding sites.

PMID: 10228169 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR127: Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 May 15;27(10):2135-44. 

Directional binding of HMG-I(Y) on four-way junction DNA and the molecular basis
for competitive binding with HMG-1 and histone H1.

Hill DA, Pedulla ML, Reeves R.

Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Department of Genetics and Cell
Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

Histone H1, HMG-1 and HMG-I(Y) are mammalian nuclear proteins possessing
distinctive DNA-binding domain structures that share the common property of
preferentially binding to four-way junction (4H) DNA, an in vitro mimic of the
in vivo genetic recombination intermediate known as the Holliday junction.
Nevertheless, these three proteins bind to 4H DNA in vitro with very different
affinities and in a mutually exclusive manner. To investigate the molecular
basis for these distinctive binding characteristics, we employed base pair
resolution hydroxyl radical footprinting to determine the precise sites of
nucleotide interactions of both HMG-1 and histone H1 on 4H DNA and compared
these contacts with those previously described for HMG-I(Y) on the same
substrate. Each of these proteins had a unique binding pattern on 4H DNA and yet
shared certain common nucleotide contacts on the arms of the 4H DNA molecule
near the branch point. Both the HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1 proteins made specific
contacts across the 4H DNA branch point, as well as interacting at discrete
sites on the arms, whereas the globular domain of histone H1 bound exclusively
to the arms of the 4H DNA substrate without contacting nucleotides at the
crossover region. Experiments employing the chemical cleavage reagent 1,
10-orthophenanthroline copper(II) attached to the C-terminal end of a
site-specifically mutagenized HMG-I(Y) protein molecule demonstrated that this
protein binds to 4H DNA in a distinctly polar, direction-specific manner.
Together these results provide an attractive molecular explanation for the
observed mutually exclusive 4H DNA-binding characteristics of these proteins and
also allow for critical assessment of proposed models for their interaction with
4H DNA substrates. The results also have important implications concerning the
possible in vivo roles of HMG-I(Y), histone H1 and HMG-1 in biological processes
such as genetic recombination and retroviral integration.

PMID: 10219086 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR128: J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12346-54. 

Structural and kinetic studies of a cisplatin-modified DNA icosamer binding to
HMG1 domain B.

Jamieson ER, Jacobson MP, Barnes CM, Chow CS, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The high mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA-binding motif found in the
non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, and some transcription factors.
Experimental evidence has demonstrated that HMG-domain proteins can play a role
in sensitizing cells to the anticancer drug cisplatin. Fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) experiments were performed in the present study to
investigate structural changes that accompany complex formation between the HMG
domain B of HMG1 and a cisplatin-modified, 20-base pair double-stranded DNA
probe containing fluorescein and rhodamine tethered at its two ends. The binding
affinity of HMG1 domain B for the cisplatin-modified DNA probe was investigated
in fluorescence titration experiments, and a value of 60 +/- 30 nM was
determined for the dissociation constant. Single photon counting methods were
employed to measure the fluorescence lifetime of the fluorescein donor in the
presence and absence of HMG1 domain B. These FRET experiments revealed a
distance change that was used to estimate a bend angle of 80-95 degrees for the
cisplatin-modified DNA upon protein binding. Stopped-flow fluorescence
spectroscopic experiments afforded kinetic parameters for HMG1 domain B binding
to the cisplatin-modified DNA probe, with kon = 1.1 +/- 0.1 x 10(9) M-1 s-1 and
koff = 30 +/- 4 s-1.

PMID: 10212205 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR129: Genes Dev. 1999 Apr 1;13(7):877-89. 

An HMG1-like protein facilitates Wnt signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Jiang LI, Sternberg PW.

Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Division of Biology, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 USA.

We show that during Caenorhabditis elegans male spicule development, the
specification of a glial versus neuronal cell fate in a canonical neurogenic
sublineage is dependent on Wnt signaling. Inactivation of a Wnt signaling
pathway mediated by the Wnt receptor LIN-17 transforms the SPD sheath cell into
its sister, the SPD neuron. We discovered a new mutant, son-1, that displays
this same cell fate transformation. The son-1 mutation enhances the phenotypes
of reduction-of-function lin-17 mutants in several developmental processes,
including vulva development, somatic gonad development, and male tail
patterning. son-1 encodes an HMG1/2-like DNA-binding protein and is localized in
all cell nuclei through development as revealed by a GFP reporter construct.
Disruption of son-1 function by RNA-mediated interference results in the same
spicule defect as caused by overexpression of POP-1, a TCF/LEF class HMG protein
known to act downstream of the Wnt signaling pathway. Our results provide in
vivo evidence for the functional involvement of an HMG1/2-like protein, SON-1,
in Wnt signaling. The sequence nonspecific HMG protein SON-1 and the sequence
specific HMG protein POP-1 might both act in the Wnt responding cells to
regulate gene transcription in opposite directions.

PMID: 10197987 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR130: Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):632-43. 

HMG-1 stimulates estrogen response element binding by estrogen receptor from
stably transfected HeLa cells.

Zhang CC, Krieg S, Shapiro DJ.

Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801, USA.

Estrogen receptor (ER) toxicity has hampered the development of vertebrate cell
lines stably expressing substantial levels of recombinant wild-type ER. To
isolate clonal lines of HeLa cells stably expressing epitope-tagged ER, we used
a construction encoding a single bicistronic mRNA, in which FLAG-epitope-tagged
human ER alpha (fER) was translated from a 5'-translation initiation site and
fused to the neomycin resistance gene, which was translated from an internal
ribosome entry site. One stable HeLa-ER-positive cell line (HeLa-ER1) produces
1,300,000 molecules of fER/cell (approximately 20-fold more ER than MCF-7
cells). The HeLa fER is biologically active in vivo, as judged by rapid death of
the cells in the presence of either 17 beta-estradiol or trans-hydroxytamoxifen
and the ability of the cell line to activate a transfected estrogen response
element (ERE)-containing reporter gene. The FLAG-tagged ER was purified to near
homogeneity in a single step by immunoaffinity chromatography with anti-FLAG
monoclonal antibody. Purified fER exhibited a distribution constant (KD) for 17
beta-estradiol of 0.45 nM. Purified HeLa fER and HeLa fER in crude nuclear
extracts exhibit similar KD values for the ERE (0.8 nM and 1 nM, respectively),
which are approximately 10 times lower than the KD of 10 nM we determined for
purified ER expressed using the baculovirus system. HMG-1 strongly stimulated
binding of both crude and purified HeLa fER to the ERE (KD of 0.25 nM). In
transfected HeLa cells, HMG-1 exhibited a dose-dependent stimulation of 17
beta-estradiol-dependent transactivation. At high levels of transfected HMG-1
expression plasmid, transactivation by ER became partially ligand-independent,
and transactivation by trans-hydroxytamoxifen was increased by more than
25-fold. These data describe a system in which ER, stably expressed in HeLa
cells and easily purified, exhibits extremely high affinity for the ERE, and
suggest that intracellular levels of HMG-1 may be limiting for ER action.

PMID: 10194768 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR131: Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2613-23. 

Multiple layers of cooperativity regulate enhanceosome-responsive RNA polymerase
II transcription complex assembly.

Ellwood K, Huang W, Johnson R, Carey M.

Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California 90095-1737, USA.

Two coordinate forms of transcriptional synergy mediate eukaryotic gene
regulation: the greater-than-additive transcriptional response to multiple
promoter-bound activators, and the sigmoidal response to increasing activator
concentration. The mechanism underlying the sigmoidal response has not been
elucidated but is almost certainly founded on the cooperative binding of
activators and the general machinery to DNA. Here we explore that mechanism by
using highly purified transcription factor preparations and a strong
Epstein-Barr virus promoter, BHLF-1, regulated by the virally encoded activator
ZEBRA. We demonstrate that two layers of cooperative binding govern
transcription complex assembly. First, the architectural proteins HMG-1 and -2
mediate cooperative formation of an enhanceosome containing ZEBRA and cellular
Sp1. This enhanceosome then recruits transcription factor IIA (TFIIA) and TFIID
to the promoter to form the DA complex. The DA complex, however, stimulates
assembly of the enhanceosome itself such that the entire reaction can occur in a
highly concerted manner. The data reveal the importance of reciprocal
cooperative interactions among activators and the general machinery in
eukaryotic gene regulation.

PMID: 10082527 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR132: J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):2994-3003. 

HMG protein family members stimulate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and
avian sarcoma virus concerted DNA integration in vitro.

Hindmarsh P, Ridky T, Reeves R, Andrake M, Skalka AM, Leis J.

Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

We have reconstituted concerted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integration in vitro with specially designed mini-donor HIV-1 DNA, a supercoiled
plasmid acceptor, purified bacterium-derived HIV-1 integrase (IN), and host HMG
protein family members. This system is comparable to one previously described
for avian sarcoma virus (ASV) (A. Aiyar et al., J. Virol. 70:3571-3580, 1996)
that was stimulated by the presence of HMG-1. Sequence analyses of individual
HIV-1 integrants showed loss of 2 bp from the ends of the donor DNA and almost
exclusive 5-bp duplications of the acceptor DNA at the site of integration. All
of the integrants sequenced were inserted into different sites in the acceptor.
These are the features associated with integration of viral DNA in vivo. We have
used the ASV and HIV-1 reconstituted systems to compare the mechanism of
concerted DNA integration and examine the role of different HMG proteins in the
reaction. Of the three HMG proteins examined, HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-I(Y), the
products formed in the presence of HMG-I(Y) for both systems most closely match
those observed in vivo. Further analysis of HMG-I(Y) mutants demonstrates that
the stimulation of integration requires an HMG-I(Y) domain involved in DNA
binding. While complexes containing HMG-I(Y), ASV IN, and donor DNA can be
detected in gel shift experiments, coprecipitation experiments failed to
demonstrate stable interactions between HMG-I(Y) and ASV IN or between HMG-I(Y)
and HIV-1 IN.

PMID: 10074149 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR133: J Biochem (Tokyo). 1999 Feb;125(2):399-405. 

The stabilized structural array of two HMG1/2-boxes endowed by a linker sequence
between them is requisite for the effective binding of HMG1 with DNA.

Saito K, Kikuchi T, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Department of Biological Science and Technology Science University of Tokyo,
Noda, Chiba, 278-8510, Japan.

High mobility group (HMG) protein 1 contains two DNA binding motifs, called
HMG1/2-boxes, linked with a linker region. The functional relationships between
the two boxes and the mechanism of involvement of the linker region for
effective binding of HMG1 were examined. The binding analyses of truncated HMG1
peptides with DNA indicated that the structural array of two boxes stabilizes
the interaction of HMG1 with DNA. The mutation analyses of the linker region
suggested that the region is equipped with tolerance for the deletion of a few
amino acid residues to allow appropriate binding of the two boxes with DNA, and
that the basic cluster in the linker sequence is in a position to interact with
DNA. The existence of tolerance for the linker sequence was found to be
conserved during the evolution of HMG1 protein homologues. A structural model
for array of two boxes associating with DNA minor groove was constructed on the
basis of the experimental results and energy minimization. The model proposes
that the DNA binding region in HMG1 covers an 18 bp DNA region and induces its
bending by about 140 degrees. The linker region may function to maintain the
structural array of two HMG1/2-boxes by direct interaction with DNA.

PMID: 9990140 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR134: J Cell Sci. 1999 Mar;112 ( Pt 5):733-47. 

Splice variants of the nuclear dot-associated Sp100 protein contain homologies
to HMG-1 and a human nuclear phosphoprotein-box motif.

Guldner HH, Szostecki C, Schroder P, Matschl U, Jensen K, Luders C, Will H,
Sternsdorf T.

Heinrich-Pette-Institut fur experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universitat Hamburg, Martinistr. 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Sp100 and PML are interferon-inducible proteins associated with a new class of
nuclear domains (known as nuclear dots or PML bodies) which play a role in
tumorigenesis, virus infections, and autoimmunity. While PML is extensively
alternatively spliced, only two splice variants are known for Sp100. Here we
describe the identification and characterization of several Sp100 splice variant
proteins and support their existence by elucidation of the 3'-end of the Sp100
gene. Some of the splice variants contain a domain of significant sequence
similarity with two previously described highly related interferon-inducible
nuclear phosphoproteins as well as to suppressin and DEAF-1, which altogether
define a novel protein motif, termed HNPP-box. One class of splice variants
contains an almost complete and highly conserved copy of the DNA-binding high
mobility group 1 protein sequence and thus represent novel HMG-box proteins.
When expressed transiently, both major classes of Sp100 splice variant proteins
localize in part to nuclear dots/PML bodies and in addition to different nuclear
domains. Furthermore, PML was occasionally redistributed. These data indicate
that alternatively spliced Sp100 proteins are expressed, differ in part in
localization from Sp100, and might bind to chromatin via the HMG domain.

PMID: 9973607 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR135: Gene. 1998 Dec 28;225(1-2):97-105. 

Selection of a cDNA clone for chicken high-mobility-group 1 (HMG1) protein
through its unusually conserved 3'-untranslated region, and improved expression
of recombinant HMG1 in Escherichia coli.

Lee KB, Brooks DJ, Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

Screening of cDNA libraries for the homologous vertebrate proteins high mobility
group (HMG) 1 and 2 using DNA probes based on the coding sequences is likely to
result in isolation of both HMG1 and HMG2 clones, as well as pseudogenes, which
may be transcribed at low levels. However, the 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs) of
HMG1 and 2 are quite distinct, and unusually conserved across species. We have
used this property to select the true chicken HMG1 cDNA clone from a chicken
lymphocyte cDNA library in lambdagt11, using a probe based on the 3'-UTR of rat
HMG1 cDNA. The chicken HMG1 cDNA clone is very similar to all the complete HMG1
cDNA clones isolated so far. We suggest that the sequence designated chicken
HMG1 in the GenBank Data Library (Accession number D14314) is, in fact, that of
HMG2a [and moreover that the recently reported mouse clone (Accession number
AF022465), proposed to encode a new HMG protein, HMG4, is also likely to encode
an HMG2a, based on the translated amino-acid sequence and 3'-UTR]. We also
report much improved expression of intact recombinant HMG1 in Escherichia coli
by the use of chloramphenicol rather than ampicillin selection and conditions
that limit cell growth. This should be general for all members of the HMG1 (and
2) family which may be toxic to cells (possibly because of the long acidic
tail), and may also prove useful in the production of other such proteins.

PMID: 9931456 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR136: Biochemistry. 1999 Jan 12;38(2):589-95. 

Differences in DNA recognition and conformational change activity between boxes
A and B in HMG2 protein.

Yoshioka K, Saito K, Tanabe T, Yamamoto A, Ando Y, Nakamura Y, Shirakawa H,
Yoshida M.

Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo,
Chiba, Japan.

High mobility group (HMG) 2 is a sequence-nonspecific DNA-binding protein
consisting of a repeat of DNA-binding domains called HMG1/2 boxes A and B and an
acidic C-terminal. To understand the mode of HMG2 interaction with DNA, we
expressed various HMG2 peptides containing HMG1/2 box(es) in Escherichia coli
cells and purified them. Gel retardation and DNA supercoiling assay indicated
that the region essential for the preferential binding of HMG2 with negatively
supercoiled DNA and DNA unwinding activity is located in box B, but not
sufficient alone. The flanking C-terminal basic region or box A linked by a
linker region is necessary to express activities. The SPR measurements certified
that the intrinsic DNA binding affinity of box B is weaker (Kd = 170 microM),
and these adjoining regions largely strengthen the affinity (Kd </= 1.2 microM).
In contrast, box A, even in the presence of the adjoining basic linker region,
showed no such activities, indicating that boxes A and B are different in their
DNA recognition mode. The computer modeling suggested that the side chain of
Phe-102 in box B is inserted into the base stack to cause DNA conformational
changes, while the side chain of Ala-16 in box A is too small to intercalate.
These represent that boxes A and B have similar tertiary structures but their
activities for DNA conformational changes obviously differ. Box B is the main
region for DNA recognition and conformational changes, and box A must play an
assistant to increase its DNA recognition.

PMID: 9888798 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR137: Dev Genet. 1998;23(4):324-34. 

DSP1 gene of Drosophila melanogaster encodes an HMG-domain protein that plays
multiple roles in development.

Mosrin-Huaman C, Canaple L, Locker D, Decoville M.

Centre de Biophysique Moleculaire, CNRS, Orleans, France.

DSP1 is an HMG-box containing protein of Drosophila melanogaster which was first
identified as a co-repressor of the Dorsal protein. Recently, the analysis of
the structure of the gene has led us to propose that DSP1 is the Drosophila
equivalent of the ubiquitous vertebrate HMG 1/2 proteins. In the present paper,
the patterns of expression of DSP1 protein and RNA in adult flies and during
development are reported. In the adults DSP1 protein is located in nurse cells
of ovaries and in brain. During eggs development uniform expression of DSP1
protein persists until the end of germband retraction. At later stages,
expression is restricted to the ventral nerve chord and brain. Using P-element
mutagenesis, we have isolated a mutant deficient in DSP1 functions. Genetic
studies of this mutant show that DSP1 protein is essential for the growth and
the development of Drosophila. In addition to be a co-repressor of the
transcriptional activator Dorsal our results provide compelling evidence that
DSP1 is a regulator involved in several pathways necessary for the development
of the fly.

PMID: 9883584 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR138: J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1628-34. 

High mobility group protein 1 interacts specifically with the core domain of
human TATA box-binding protein and interferes with transcription factor IIB
within the pre-initiation complex.

Sutrias-Grau M, Bianchi ME, Bernues J.

Departament Biologia Molecular i Cellular, Centre d'Investigacio i
Desenvolupament-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, J. Girona
18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

The high mobility group (HMG) box domain has defined a family of proteins,
mostly transcription factors, that specifically interacts with DNA on the minor
groove and sharply bends it. The founding member of the family, HMG1, does not
specifically recognize regular B-DNA but is recruited to DNA by interaction with
other transcription factors and TATA box-binding protein (TBP). However,
conflicting effects of HMG1 on transcription have been reported. We show that
the interaction between HMG1 and TBP is species-specific. This interaction in
turn affects the interaction of TBP with transcription factor (TF) IIB and is
competed by TFIIA. A primary binding site was mapped to the H2' alpha-helix in
the highly conserved core domain of human TBP. On HMG1, the primary binding site
was only in the HMG box A, and HMG box A was also sufficient to interact with
native TFIID. Both HMG boxes efficiently repressed transcription in vitro as
fusions to the Gal4-DNA binding domain. Additionally, HMG box B showed a weak
level of activation at very low amounts. These results suggest a general
involvement of HMG1 at the early stages of polymerase II transcription that may
result in subtle activation or repression of individual genes.

PMID: 9880542 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR139: Plant Physiol. 1999 Jan;119(1):41-8. 

Arachidonic acid alters tomato HMG expression and fruit growth and induces
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase-independent lycopene
accumulation 

Rodriguez-Concepcion M, Gruissem W.

Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, 211 Koshland Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, California 94720-3102, USA.

Regulation of isoprenoid end-product synthesis required for normal growth and
development in plants is not well understood. To investigate the extent to which
specific genes for the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
(HMGR) are involved in end-product regulation, we manipulated expression of the
HMG1 and HMG2 genes in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruit using arachidonic
acid (AA). In developing young fruit AA blocked fruit growth, inhibited HMG1,
and activated HMG2 expression. These results are consistent with other reports
indicating that HMG1 expression is closely correlated with growth processes
requiring phytosterol production. In mature-green fruit AA strongly induced the
expression of HMG2, PSY1 (the gene for phytoene synthase), and lycopene
accumulation before the normal onset of carotenoid synthesis and ripening. The
induction of lycopene synthesis was not blocked by inhibition of HMGR activity
using mevinolin, suggesting that cytoplasmic HMGR is not required for carotenoid
synthesis. Our results are consistent with the function of an alternative
plastid isoprenoid pathway (the Rohmer pathway) that appears to direct the
production of carotenoids during tomato fruit ripening.

PMID: 0009880344 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]



NR140: J Biochem (Tokyo). 1998 Sep;124(3):519-27. 

High mobility group proteins 1 and 2 can function as DNA-binding regulatory
components for DNA-dependent protein kinase in vitro.

Yumoto Y, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Suwa A, Watanabe F, Teraoka H.

Department of Pathological Biochemistry, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) holoenzyme consists of a 470-kDa
catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), a DNA-binding regulatory component known as Ku
protein, and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) with ends. We previously reported that
the activity of DNA-PK in vitro is stimulated by non-histone chromosomal high
mobility group proteins (HMG) 1 and 2 comprising two similar repeats, termed
domains A and B, and an acidic C-terminal. Here we demonstrate that in vitro
HMG1 and 2 can completely replace Ku protein as the DNA-binding regulatory
component of DNA-PK. DNA-PKcs and Ku protein were separately purified from Raji
nuclear extracts, and reconstituted into the DNA-PK holoenzyme in the presence
of dsDNA. DNA-PKcs alone catalyzed DNA-dependent phosphorylation at a very low
but significant level, and HMG1 and 2 markedly stimulated the phosphorylation of
alpha-casein and a specific peptide substrate in a DNA-dependent manner. The
HMG2-domains (A+B) polypeptide devoid of the C-terminal acidic region was more
effective for DNA-PKcs stimulation than the full-length HMG2, and HMG2-domain A
and -domain B polypeptides. Anti(Ku protein) antibodies inhibited the
DNA-dependent phosphorylation activity of the DNA-PKcs:Ku protein complex, but
not that of DNA-PKcs alone or when it was complexed with HMG1 or 2. These
results demonstrate that HMG1 and 2 can function as the DNA-binding regulatory
component for DNA-PKcs in vitro, and imply that a conformational change of
dsDNA, which is elicited by regulatory components, is important for the
stimulation of DNA-PK activity of DNA-PKcs.

PMID: 9722660 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR141: Plant J. 1998 Jun;14(5):623-31. 

Four differently chromatin-associated maize HMG domain proteins modulate DNA
structure and act as architectural elements in nucleoprotein complexes.

Ritt C, Grimm R, Fernandez S, Alonso JC, Grasser KD.

Institut fur Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, Germany.

In contrast to other eukaryotes which usually express two closely related
HMG1-like proteins, plant cells have multiple relatively variable proteins of
this type. A systematic analysis of the DNA-binding properties of four
chromosomal HMG domain proteins from maize revealed that they bind linear DNA
with similar affinity. HMGa, HMGc1/2 and HMGd specifically recognise diverse DNA
structures such as DNA mini-circles and supercoiled DNA. They induce
DNA-bending, and constrain negative superhelical turns in DNA. In the presence
of DNA, the HMG domain proteins can self-associate, whereas they are monomeric
in solution. The maize HMG1-like proteins have the ability to facilitate the
formation of nucleoprotein structures to different extents, since they can
efficiently replace a bacterial chromatin-associated protein required for the
site-specific beta-mediated recombination. A variable function of the HMG1-like
proteins is indicated by their differential association with maize chromatin, as
judged by their 'extractability' from chromatin with spermine and ethidium
bromide. Collectively, these findings suggest that the various plant chromosomal
HMG domain proteins could be adapted to act in different nucleoprotein
structures in vivo.

PMID: 9675905 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR142: Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4471-87. 

High-mobility group chromatin proteins 1 and 2 functionally interact with
steroid hormone receptors to enhance their DNA binding in vitro and
transcriptional activity in mammalian cells.

Boonyaratanakornkit V, Melvin V, Prendergast P, Altmann M, Ronfani L, Bianchi
ME, Taraseviciene L, Nordeen SK, Allegretto EA, Edwards DP.

Department of Pathology & Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

We previously reported that the chromatin high-mobility group protein 1 (HMG-1)
enhances the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of progesterone receptor
(PR) in vitro, thus providing the first evidence that HMG-1 may have a
coregulatory role in steroid receptor-mediated gene transcription. Here we show
that HMG-1 and the highly related HMG-2 stimulate DNA binding by other steroid
receptors, including estrogen, androgen, and glucocorticoid receptors, but have
no effect on DNA binding by several nonsteroid nuclear receptors, including
retinoid acid receptor (RAR), retinoic X receptor (RXR), and vitamin D receptor
(VDR). As highly purified recombinant full-length proteins, all steroid
receptors tested exhibited weak binding affinity for their optimal palindromic
hormone response elements (HREs), and the addition of purified HMG-1 or -2
substantially increased their affinity for HREs. Purified RAR, RXR, and VDR also
exhibited little to no detectable binding to their cognate direct repeat HREs
but, in contrast to results with steroid receptors, the addition of HMG-1 or
HMG-2 had no stimulatory effect. Instead, the addition of purified RXR enhanced
RAR and VDR DNA binding through a heterodimerization mechanism and HMG-1 or
HMG-2 had no further effect on DNA binding by RXR-RAR or RXR-VDR heterodimers.
HMG-1 and HMG-2 (HMG-1/-2) themselves do not bind to progesterone response
elements, but in the presence of PR they were detected as part of an HMG-PR-DNA
ternary complex. HMG-1/-2 can also interact transiently in vitro with PR in the
absence of DNA; however, no direct protein interaction was detected with VDR.
These results, taken together with the fact that PR can bend its target DNA and
that HMG-1/-2 are non-sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that recognize DNA
structure, suggest that HMG-1/-2 are recruited to the PR-DNA complex by the
combined effect of transient protein interaction and DNA bending. In
transient-transfection assays, coexpression of HMG-1 or HMG-2 increased
PR-mediated transcription in mammalian cells by as much as 7- to 10-fold without
altering the basal promoter activity of target reporter genes. This increase in
PR-mediated gene activation by coexpression of HMG-1/-2 was observed in
different cell types and with different target promoters, suggesting a
generality to the functional interaction between HMG-1/-2 and PR in vivo.
Cotransfection of HMG-1 also increased reporter gene activation mediated by
other steroid receptors, including glucocorticoid and androgen receptors, but it
had a minimal influence on VDR-dependent transcription in vivo. These results
support the conclusion that HMG-1/-2 are coregulatory proteins that increase the
DNA binding and transcriptional activity of the steroid hormone class of
receptors but that do not functionally interact with certain nonsteroid classes
of nuclear receptors.

PMID: 9671457 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR143: Eur J Biochem. 1998 May 1;253(3):787-95. 

DNA-binding properties of the tandem HMG boxes of high-mobility-group protein 1
(HMG1).

Grasser KD, Teo SH, Lee KB, Broadhurst RW, Rees C, Hardman CH, Thomas JO.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, UK.

High-mobility-group protein 1 (HMG1) is a conserved chromosomal protein with two
homologous DNA-binding HMG-box domains, A and B, linked by a short basic region
to an acidic carboxy-terminal tail. NMR spectroscopy on the free didomain (AB)
shows that the two HMG boxes do not interact. The didomain has a higher affinity
for all DNA substrates tested than single HMG-box domains and has a
significantly higher ability to distort DNA by bending and supercoiling. The
interaction of the didomain with DNA is stabilized by the presence of the basic
region (approximately 20 residues, 9 of which are Lys) that links the second HMG
box to the acidic tail in intact HMG1; this may be, at least in part, why this
region also enhances supercoiling of relaxed circular DNA by the didomain and
circularization of short DNA fragments (in the presence of ligase). Competition
assays suggest significantly different structure-specific preferences of single
and tandem HMG boxes for four-way junction and supercoiled plasmid DNA. Binding
to supercoiled DNA appears to be promoted by protein oligomerization, which is
pronounced for the didomains. Electron microscopy suggests that the oligomers
are globular aggregates, associated with DNA looping. One box versus two (or
several) is likely to be an important determinant of the properties of
(non-sequence specific) HMG-box proteins.

PMID: 9654080 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR144: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jun 23;95(13):7316-21. 

Interaction of SP100 with HP1 proteins: a link between the promyelocytic
leukemia-associated nuclear bodies and the chromatin compartment.

Seeler JS, Marchio A, Sitterlin D, Transy C, Dejean A.

Unite de Recombinaison et Expression Genetique, Institut National de la Sante et
de la Recherche Medicale U163, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris
Cedex 15.

The PML/SP100 nuclear bodies (NBs) were first described as discrete subnuclear
structures containing the SP100 protein. Subsequently, they were shown to
contain the PML protein which is part of the oncogenic PML-RARalpha hybrid
produced by the t(15;17) chromosomal translocation characteristic of acute
promyelocytic leukemia. Yet, the physiological role of these nuclear bodies
remains unknown. Here, we show that SP100 binds to members of the
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) families of non-histone chromosomal proteins.
Further, we demonstrate that a naturally occurring splice variant of SP100, here
called SP100-HMG, is a member of the high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein
family and may thus possess DNA-binding potential. Both HP1 and SP100-HMG
concentrate in the PML/SP100 NBs, and overexpression of SP100 leads to enhanced
accumulation of endogenous HP1 in these structures. When bound to a promoter,
SP100, SP100-HMG and HP1 behave as transcriptional repressors in transfected
mammalian cells. These observations present molecular evidence for an
association between the PML/SP100 NBs and the chromatin nuclear compartment.
They support a model in which the NBs may play a role in certain aspects of
chromatin dynamics.

PMID: 9636146 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR145: Biochemistry. 1998 Jun 16;37(24):8808-15. 

Human replication protein A preferentially binds cisplatin-damaged duplex DNA in
vitro.

Patrick SM, Turchi JJ.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University School
of Medicine, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA.

Fractionation of human cell extracts by cisplatin-DNA affinity chromatography
was employed to identify proteins capable of binding cisplatin-damaged DNA. A
specific protein-DNA complex, termed DRP-3, was identified in an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) using a cisplatin-damaged DNA probe. Using this
assay we purified DRP-3 and the final fraction contained proteins of 70, 53, 46,
32, and 14 kDa. On the basis of subunit molecular weights, antibody reactivity,
and DNA binding activities, DRP-3 was identified as human replication protein A
(hRPA). Therefore, we assessed the binding of recombinant human RPA (rhRPA) to
duplex cisplatin-damaged DNA in vitro. Global treatment of a highly purified
completely duplex 44-bp DNA with cisplatin resulted in a 10-20-fold increase in
rhRPA binding compared to the undamaged control. The stability of the RPA-DNA
complexes was assessed, and NaCl and MgCl2 concentrations that completely
inhibited rhRPA binding to undamaged DNA had only a minimal effect on binding to
duplex platinated DNA. We assessed rhRPA binding to a duplex DNA containing a
single site-specific 1,2-d(GpG) cisplatin adduct, and the results revealed a
4-6-fold increase in binding to this DNA substrate compared to an undamaged
control DNA of identical sequence. These results are consistent with RPA being
involved in the initial recognition of cisplatin-damaged DNA, possibly mediating
DNA repair events. Therefore, we assessed how another cisplatin DNA binding
protein, HMG-1, affected the ability of rhRPA to bind damaged DNA. Competition
binding assays show minimal dissociation of either protein from
cisplatin-damaged DNA during the course of the reaction. Simultaneous addition
experiments revealed that HMG-1 binding to cisplatin-damaged DNA was minimally
affected by rhRPA, while HMG-1 inhibited the damaged-DNA binding activity of
rhRPA. These data are consistent with HMG-1 blocking DNA repair and possibly
having the capability to enhance the cytotoxic efficacy of the drug cisplatin.

PMID: 9628743 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR146: Exp Cell Res. 1998 May 25;241(1):269-72. 

Estrogen treatment induces elevated expression of HMG1 in MCF-7 cells.

Chau KY, Lam HY, Lee KL.

Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

The high mobility group (HMG) 1 protein is a highly conserved and ubiquitous
chromosomal protein found enriched in active chromatin. In this study, we have
investigated the effect of estrogen on the expression of the human high mobility
group protein HMG1 gene and found that the HMG1 mRNA level in MCF-7 cells was
sharply increased 2.5-fold after 30 min of estrogen treatment. Under continuous
estrogen treatment, the HMG1 mRNA level decreased to a 1.5 times that of the
basal level at 90 min and remained at this elevated level under estrogen
treatment for up to 24 h. These results support the recent finding by Verrier et
al. (C.S. Verrier, 1997, Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 1009-1019) that HMG1 promotes the
binding of the estrogen receptor to the estrogen response element and further
reinforce our believe that HMG1 plays a significant role in estrogen-induced
gene expression.

PMID: 9633537 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR147: Plant Mol Biol. 1998 May;37(2):235-41. 

Abundance of mRNAs encoding HMG1/HMG2 class high-mobility-group DNA-binding
proteins are differentially regulated in cotyledons of Pharbitis nil.

O'Neill SD, Zheng CC.

Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at Davis, 95616, USA.

The abundance of an mRNA encoding an HMG 1/2 protein from Pharbitis nil (HMG1)
has been previously shown to be regulated by light and an endogenous rhythm in
cotyledons. A second Pharbitis nil HMG cDNA (HMG2) was characterized. The
sequence of HMG2 was 82% and 86% identical to HMG1 at the nucleotide and amino
acid level, respectively. As with HMG1, HMG2 mRNA was detected in all vegetative
tissues and was most abundant in roots. However, unlike HMG1, HMG2 mRNA
abundance did not increase upon transfer of cotyledons to darkness and did not
exhibit regulation by an endogenous circadian rhythm when maintained in
continuous darkness over a 68 h period. Similarly, while the abundance of HMG1
mRNA during a dark period that induced photoperiodically controlled flowering
was dramatically affected by brief light exposure (night break), this treatment
had no effect on HMG2 mRNA abundance. Collectively, these data are consistent
with a role of HMG1 in contributing to the circadian-regulated and/or
dark-regulated gene expression with constitutive expression of HMG2 playing a
housekeeping role in the general regulation of gene expression in Pharbitis nil
cotyledons.

PMID: 9617797 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR148: J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 24;273(17):10355-61. 

DNA bending by the chromosomal protein HMG1 and its high mobility group box
domains. Effect of flanking sequences.

Stros M.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolska 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic.

HMG1 is an evolutionarily highly conserved chromosomal protein consisting of two
folded DNA-binding domains, A and B ("high mobility group (HMG) boxes"), and an
acidic C-terminal domain. Several lines of evidence suggest that previously
reported sequence-independent DNA bending and looping by HMG1 and its HMG box
domains might be important for the proposed role of the protein in transcription
and recombination. We have used ligase-mediated circularization assays to
investigate the contribution of the individual A and B HMG1 box domains and of
the linker region between A/B- and B/C-domains, which flank the "minimal"
B-domain (residues 92-162), to the ability of the HMG1 protein (residues 1-215)
to bend DNA. Neither the minimal B-domain nor the minimal B-domain with a
7-residue N-terminal extension (85TKKKFKD91) bent the DNA. The attachment of an
extra 18-residue C-terminal additional extension (residues 163-180) to the
minimal B-domain had only a small effect on the ability of the HMG box to bend
DNA. On the other hand, circularization assay with a B-domain having both
7-residue N-terminal and 18-residue C-terminal flanking sequences (residues
85-180) revealed a strong bending of the DNA, suggesting that both extensions
are a prerequisite for efficient DNA bending by the B-domain. We have also shown
that a single lysine residue (Lys90) in a short N-terminal sequence 90KD91
attached to the B-domain is sufficient for strong distortion of DNA by bending,
provided that the B-domain is flanked by the 18-residue C-terminal flanking
sequence. Although the DNA bending potential of HMG1 seems to be predominantly
due to the B-domain flanked by basic sequences, covalent attachment of the A-
and B-domains is necessary for efficient DNA flexure and the ability of the
(A+B)-bidomain to bend DNA is further modulated in the native HMG1 protein by
its acidic C-domain.

PMID: 9553091 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR149: Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 8;246(1):137-41. 

Non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and 2 enhance ligation reaction of DNA
double-strand breaks.

Nagaki S, Yamamoto M, Yumoto Y, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Teraoka H.

Department of Pathological Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

DNA ligase IV in a complex with XRCC4 is responsible for DNA end-joining in
repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) and V(D)J recombination. We found that
non-histone chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 enhanced the
ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA with DNA ligase IV from rat liver nuclear
extract. Intra-molecular and inter-molecular ligations of cohesive-ended and
blunt-ended DNA were markedly stimulated by HMG1 and 2. Recombinant HMG2-domain
A, B, and (A + B) polypeptides were similarly, but non-identically, effective
for the stimulation of DSB ligation reaction. Ligation of single-strand breaks
(nicks) was only slightly activated by the HMG proteins. The DNA end-binding Ku
protein singly or in combination with the catalytic component of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) as the DNA-PK holoenzyme was ineffective for the
ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA. Although the stimulatory effect of HMG1 and 2
on ligation of DSB in vitro was not specific to DNA ligase IV, these results
suggest that HMG1 and 2 are involved in the final ligation step in DNA
end-joining processes of DSB repair and V(D)J recombination.

PMID: 9600082 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR150: Genomics. 1998 Apr 15;49(2):247-52. 

Hmg4, a new member of the Hmg1/2 gene family.

Vaccari T, Beltrame M, Ferrari S, Bianchi ME.

DIBIT, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins are abundant components of mammalian nuclei
and fall into three families. The members of one such family, HMG1 and HMG2, are
ubiquitously expressed and facilitate the formation of nucleoprotein complexes
where the DNA is sharply bent. We have identified a mouse cDNA that codes for a
novel 200-amino-acid protein of the HMG1/2 family, which we called HMG4. The
mouse Hmg4 gene is highly expressed in the embryo; Hmg4 transcripts are barely
detectable in adult tissues. The human HMG4 gene, which is extremely similar to
its mouse homolog, has been sequenced as part of chromosome X, band q28. HMG4,
HMG1, and HMG2 proteins have been highly conserved during vertebrate evolution,
suggesting that each has at least some unique property. It is possible that HMG4
is required during development.

PMID: 9598312 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR151: Gene Ther. 1998 Feb;5(2):240-6. 

Gene transduction for disseminated intraperitoneal tumor using cationic
liposomes containing non-histone chromatin proteins: cationic liposomal gene
therapy of carcinomatosa.

Namiki Y, Takahashi T, Ohno T.

Department of Microbiology, Institute of DNA Medicine, Jikei University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Cationic liposome-mediated gene therapy of cancer has been examined in a
disseminated intraperitoneal tumor model. A combination of the strong CAG
promoter-enhancer unit and high mobility group 1,2 (HMG-1,2) proteins has been
used to improve transfection efficiency. The optimal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
and HMG-1,2 concentration ratio was determined in in vitro studies.
Subsequently, we administered the liposome-DNA-HMG-1,2 complex intraperitoneally
to tumor bearing nude mice and defined the most efficient concentration of
liposomes. Using this approach, the median survival of tumor bearing nude mice
was prolonged by the administration of a human tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) gene inserted into a eukaryotic strong expression vector
(pcagTNF-alpha) and exogenously added interferon-gamma (INF-gamma) (72 +/- 3
days: mean +/- s.e.). By contrast, survival was 36 +/- 3, 39 +/- 3 and 46 +/- 4
days in group receiving the TNF-alpha gene inserted in the reverse orientation
(pcagTNF-alpha R) and normal saline (NS), pcagTNF-alpha R and INF-gamma and
pcagTNF-alpha and NS, respectively. These results demonstrate an efficient
approach for gene therapy of disseminated intraperitoneal cancer.

PMID: 9578844 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR152: Exp Nephrol. 1998 Mar-Apr;6(2):144-7. 

The HVJ liposome method.

Isaka Y, Akagi Y, Kaneda Y, Imai E.

1st Department of Medicine, Osaka University School of Medicine, Japan.

Recent advancement of gene technology allows us a practical approach to gene
therapy. Among various in vivo gene transfer techniques available, the HVJ
liposome method is an efficient procedure which could target the glomerular
cells. Using this method, HVJ-mediated cell fusion activity enables us to
introduce genetic materials directly into the cytosol without degradation. In
addition, cointroduction of non-histone nuclear protein, high-mobility group
(HMG-1), efficiently facilitates migration of foreign DNA to the nucleus.
Although there still exist some limitations, the HVJ liposome method may be
applicable to the treatment of glomerular diseases as well as to analysis of the
molecular aspects of renal pathophysiology.

PMID: 9567220 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR153: J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):6582-90. 

Assembly, remodeling, and histone binding capabilities of yeast nucleosome
assembly protein 1.

McQuibban GA, Commisso-Cappelli CN, Lewis PN.

Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada.

Recombinant yeast nucleosome assembly protein (yNAP-1) facilitates the formation
of uniformly spaced nucleosomes from high molecular weight DNA and core histone
octamers. No additional factors or metabolites are required. The repeat length
of the chromatin produced is about 146 base pairs. To obtain the most distinct
nucleosomal ladders, the core histones must preexist as an octamer complex.
yNAP-1 forms complexes with core histones as judged by native gel
electrophoresis, chemical cross-linking, limited histone proteolysis, and
affinity blotting. A discrete complex was observed with a probable ratio of
yNAP-1 to histone octamer of 4:1. Chromatin produced by salt dialysis does not
contain uniformly spaced nucleosomes, but subsequent incubation with yNAP-1
creates uniform spacing. Trypsin-treated core octamers that lack amino termini,
although capable of forming core particles with core-length DNA by salt
dialysis, are not assembled by yNAP-1 into uniformly spaced nucleosomes on high
molecular weight DNA. Proteolytic removal of the amino termini of the core
histones precludes complex formation between a histone octamer and yNAP-1.
Affinity blotting also demonstrates that yNAP-1 binds linker histones and high
mobility group (HMG)-1/HMG-2 but not HMG-14. Competition experiments with
poly-L-arginine, poly-L-lysine, and protamine reveal that yNAP-1 binds to core
and linker histones more tightly despite the much higher positive charge
densities of the former molecules. Naturally occurring acetylated histone H4
species show no evidence for differential yNAP-1 binding. yNAP-1 is not bound
tightly to the resulting chromatin after deposition and thus could act
catalytically.

PMID: 9497395 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR154: Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Mar 4;1396(1):47-50. 

Isolation and characterization of a cDNA encoding a high mobility group protein
HMG-1 from Canavalia gladiata D.C.

Yamamoto S, Minamikawa T.

Department of Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Japan.

A cDNA clone encoding a HMG-1 protein from maturing seeds of Canavalia gladiata
was isolated and characterized with respect to its sequence, genomic
organization and the expression pattern in seeds. The predicted polypeptide had
the characteristic conserved motifs of the HMG-1/2 protein including N-terminal
basic region, one HMG-box and polyacidic carboxy terminus. Southern blot
analysis suggested that the HMG-1 gene is a single copy gene. Northern blot
analysis indicated that the HMG-1 gene was expressed both in maturing and
germinated seeds.

PMID: 9524219 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR155: Biochimie. 1997 Dec;79(12):717-23. 

Decreased expression of the high-mobility group protein T160 by antisense RNA
impairs the growth of mouse fibroblasts.

Hertel L, Foresta P, Barbiero G, Ying GG, Bonelli G, Baccino FM, Landolfo S,
Gariglio M.

Department of Medical Sciences, Medical School of Novara, Italy.

The T160 protein belongs to the HMG-1 box protein family and preferentially
binds to non-B-DNA conformations with no sequence specificity. Its exact role
has yet to be defined, though it seems to participate in processes involving
DNA, such as replication, transcription and recombination. We have used an
antisense RNA strategy to investigate its role in cell growth and proliferation.
T160 expression is strongly suppressed by stable introduction of an antisense
construct into NIH3T3 cells, and this decrease is accompanied by substantial
changes in the growth properties of the stable transfectants. Impaired growth of
T160- cells was mainly related to two mechanisms: i) decreased rates of cell
proliferation at normal serum concentration; and ii) occurrence of cell death by
apoptosis at low serum concentration, as demonstrated by both flow cytometry and
microscopy. The finding that decreased T160 availability affects cell
proliferation, provides further evidence of its involvement in a basic cell
function, such as DNA replication.

PMID: 9523013 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR156: Biochemistry. 1998 Feb 24;37(8):2673-81. 

Basic and acidic regions flanking the HMG domain of maize HMGa modulate the
interactions with DNA and the self-association of the protein.

Ritt C, Grimm R, Fernandez S, Alonso JC, Grasser KD.

Institut fur Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, Schanzlestrasse
1, D-79104 Freiburg, FRG.

The maize HMGa protein is a typical member of the family of plant chromosomal
HMG1-like proteins. The HMG domain of HMGa is flanked by a basic N-terminal
domain characteristic for plant HMG1-like proteins, and is linked to the acidic
C-terminal domain by a short basic region. Various derivatives of the HMGa
protein were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified. The individual HMG
domain can functionally complement the defect of the HU-like
chromatin-associated Hbsu protein in Bacillus subtilis. The basic N-terminal
domain which contacts DNA enhances the affinity of the protein for linear DNA,
whereas it has little effect on the structure-specific binding to DNA
minicircles. The acidic C-terminal domain reduces the affinity of HMGa for
linear DNA, but does not affect to the same extent the recognition of DNA
structure which is an intrinsic property of the HMG domain. The efficiency of
the HMGa constructs to facilitate circularization of short DNA fragments in the
presence of DNA ligase is like the binding to linear DNA altered by the basic
and acidic domains flanking the HMG domain, while the supercoiling activity of
HMGa is only slightly influenced by the same regions. Both the basic N-terminal
and the acidic C-terminal domains contribute directly to the self-association of
HMGa in the presence of DNA. Collectively, these findings suggest that the
intrinsic properties of the HMG domain can be modulated within the HMGa protein
by the basic and acidic domains.

PMID: 9485418 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR157: Genes Dev. 1998 Feb 15;12(4):462-72. 

High mobility group protein-1 (HMG-1) is a unique activator of p53.

Jayaraman L, Moorthy NC, Murthy KG, Manley JL, Bustin M, Prives C.

Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York
10027, USA.

The binding of p53 protein to DNA is stimulated by its interaction with covalent
as well as noncovalent modifiers. We report the identification of a factor from
HeLa nuclear extracts that activates p53 DNA binding. This factor was purified
to homogeneity and identified as the high mobility group protein, HMG-1. HMG-1
belongs to a family of highly conserved chromatin-associated nucleoproteins that
bend DNA and facilitate the binding of various transcription factors to their
cognate DNA sequences. We demonstrate that recombinant His-tagged HMG-1 enhances
p53 DNA binding in vitro and also that HMG-1 and p53 can interact directly in
vitro. Unexpectedly, HMG-1 also stimulates DNA binding by p53Delta30, a
carboxy-terminally deleted form of the protein that is considered to be
constitutively active, suggesting that HMG-1 stimulates p53 by a mechanism that
is distinct from other known activators of p53. Finally, using transient
transfection assays we show that HMG-1 can increase p53 and p53Delta30-mediated
transactivation in vivo. HMG-1 promotes the assembly of higher order p53
nucleoprotein structures, and these data, along with the fact that HMG-1 is
capable of bending DNA, suggest that HMG-1 may activate p53 DNA binding by a
novel mechanism involving a structural change in the target DNA.

PMID: 9472015 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR158: Eur J Biochem. 1998 Jan 15;251(1-2):427-34. 

Formation of large nucleoprotein complexes upon binding of the
high-mobility-group (HMG) box B-domain of HMG1 protein to supercoiled DNA.

Stros M, Reich J.

Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Brno.
stros@ibp.cz

High-mobility group (HMG) 1 is a relatively highly abundant chromosomal protein
with structural- rather than sequence-specific preference for binding to DNA.
HMG1 has two highly related, folded domains A and B (HMG boxes), attached by a
short basic region to an acidic C-terminal domain. We have studied binding of
the B-domain of HMG1 protein and its mutants to supercoiled DNA by a
gel-retardation assay and electron microscopy. Using a gel-retardation assay, we
have demonstrated that HMG1 or HMG1 lacking the acidic C-terminal domain [i.e.
HMG1(A+B) bi-domain], but not the isolated B-domain, could preferentially bind
supercoiled over-relaxed closed circular or linear DNA. Mutational analysis of
the HMG1 B-domain revealed that replacement of Lys96 of the extended N-terminal
segment (and much less the neighboring Arg97) and Lys128 of helix II to glutamic
acid severely impaired binding of the HMG box domain to supercoiled DNA. The
latter mutation within helix II significantly decreased the alpha-helical
content of the B-domain as revealed by circular dichroism. We have also shown
that mutation of several residues within helix I of the B-domain, in particular
Arg110, resulted in a diminished binding to supercoiled DNA as revealed by
intensive smearing and reduced retardation of the protein/DNA complexes. These
findings indicated that the extended N-terminus, helix I and helix II of the
HMG1 B-domain are likely in contact with DNA. Electron microscopy revealed that
the B-domain could bind to supercoiled DNA at higher HMG/DNA molar ratios as
oligomeric protein beads with subsequent association of the beads into large
nucleoprotein complexes from which many looped DNA molecules emerged. Most of
the introduced mutations within all three helices of the B-domain (involving
mainly basic and aromatic residues) abolished formation of the large
nucleoprotein complexes even though the binding of the HMG box to supercoiled
DNA was retained as revealed by a gel-retardation assay. A model for the
interaction of the B-domain of HMG 1 with supercoiled DNA is presented and
discussed.

PMID: 9492314 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR159: Clin Exp Immunol. 1998 Feb;111(2):402-7. 

Prevalence and characterization of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (P-ANCA) directed against HMG1 and HMG2 in ulcerative colitis (UC).

Sobajima J, Ozaki S, Uesugi H, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

In a previous study, we reported that the high mobility group (HMG) non-histone
chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were novel target antigens of P-ANCA. In this
study, we determined the immunodiagnostic value of anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies in
patients with UC. Sixty sera from patients with UC were tested for reactivity
with HMG1 and HMG2 by means of ELISA. Anti-HMG1 antibody was detected in 32% of
patients (40% of P-ANCA+ patients). Anti-HMG2 antibody was detected in 33% (40%
of P-ANCA+ patients). Thirty-five percent of sera were positive for antibody to
either HMG1 or HMG2 (43% of P-ANCA+ patients). P-ANCA+ patients expressed
anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies with significantly greater frequency compared with
P-ANCA- patients. Furthermore, the anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies were significantly
related to disease activity in UC. Sixteen of the 18 UC patients, who had high
titres of anti-HMG1 or -HMG2 antibody during the active phase, showed lower
titres in the inactive phase. Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies appear to be useful as a
marker for disease activity in UC.

PMID: 9486411 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR160: Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jan 21;1395(2):228-36. 

Enhancement of transcription factor, USF, binding to the adenovirus major late
promoter: effect of dithiothreitol and high mobility group protein-1.

Marmillot P, Scovell W.

Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, OH 43403, USA.

Up-stream stimulatory factor (USF)1 is a human transcription factor which binds
specifically to the E-box in the Ad MLP located at - 58 from the start site. The
nature of USF binding on a Ad MLP DNA fragment was investigated in the presence
of DTT and also in the presence of purified HMG-1 using electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. We show that the binding capacity of USF for the E-box increases
significantly with increasing DTT concentrations. At the higher DTT levels, a
second USF-DNA complex is formed in which there is co-occupation of both the
E-box and the initiator sequence. The stability of the second complex is largely
refractory to an excess of unlabeled oligonucleotide which contains the
initiator sequence. These findings indicate a cooperative binding interaction
between USF ligands bound simultaneously at the E-box and the Inr sequence. Two
models are proposed which are consistent with these data. Furthermore,
experiments indicate that the presence of HMG-1, a nuclear protein known to
influence transcriptional activity, increases USF binding activity at the E-box
by as much as 100%. These findings indicate that both reducing conditions and
HMG-1 may act as modulators of USF-regulated transcription.

PMID: 9473681 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR161: Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 15;250(3):646-52. 

Variability in Arabidopsis thaliana chromosomal high-mobility-group-1-like
proteins.

Stemmer C, Ritt C, Igloi GL, Grimm R, Grasser KD.

Institut fur Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, Germany.

The vertebrate high-mobility-group (HMG) protein HMG1 is an abundant non-histone
protein which is considered as an architectural element in chromatin. In the
monocotyledonous plant maize, four different HMG1-like proteins (HMGa, HMGc1/2,
HMGd) have been identified, whereas other eukaryotes usually express only two
different proteins of this type. We have examined here the HMG1-like proteins of
the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The isolation and analysis of
cDNAs encoding five different so far uncharacterised HMG1-like proteins (now
termed HMG alpha, HMG beta1/2, HMG gamma, HMG delta) from Arabidopsis indicates
that the expression of multiple HMG1-like proteins is a general feature of
(higher) plants. The Arabidopsis HMG1-like proteins contain an HMG domain as a
common feature, but outside this conserved DNA-binding motif the amino acid
sequences are significantly different indicating that this protein family
displays a greater structural variability in plants than in other eukaryotes.
The five HMG1-like proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified.
They bind with somewhat different affinity to linear double-stranded DNA. The
recognition of DNA structure is evident from their preferential interaction with
DNA minicircles relative to linear DNA. Reverse-transcribed PCR suggested that
the five HMG1-like genes are simultaneously expressed in Arabidopsis leaves and
suspension culture cells.

PMID: 9461286 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR162: Eur J Biochem. 1997 Dec 1;250(2):403-10. 

Dof DNA-binding domains of plant transcription factors contribute to multiple
protein-protein interactions.

Yanagisawa S.

Department of Life Sciences (Chemistry), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Meguro, Japan.

Dof proteins are a family of plant transcription factors that have a strongly
conserved DNA-binding domain, designated the Dof domain. This domain has the
potential to form a single zinc finger. This report describes the
self-association of a maize Dof protein, Dof1 (previously designated MNB1a).
Affinity chromatography revealed that Dof1 also interacted with another maize
Dof protein, Dof2, as well as with high-mobility-group (HMG) protein 1. Results
of mapping of the region required for the protein-protein interactions of Dof1
suggested that these interactions may be mediated by the Dof domain. When gel
mobility shift assays were performed with purified recombinant Dof proteins,
homomeric and heteromeric complexes of Dof proteins on DNA were detected. It
seems possible that formation of complexes of different Dof proteins through
direct protein-protein interactions might be involved in the regulation of
transcription. Evidence is also presented that HMG1 has an effect on the binding
of Dof1 to DNA. Therefore, it appears that the Dof domain is a multifunctional
domain that is involved not merely in binding to DNA but also in multiple
protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 9428691 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR163: Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Nov 20;1354(3):279-90. 

High-mobility group 1 protein inhibits helicase catalyzed displacement of
cisplatin-damaged DNA.

Patrick SM, Henkels KM, Turchi JJ.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University,
Dayton, OH 45435, USA.

We have determined the effect of HMG-1 bound to cisplatin-damaged DNA on the
activities of calf helicase E. DNase I protection analysis demonstrated HMG-1
bound a cisplatin-damaged 24 base oligonucleotide annealed to M13mp18.
Exonuclease digestion experiments revealed that greater than 90% of the DNA
substrates contained a single site specific cisplatin adduct and, maximally, 65%
of the substrates were bound by HMG-1. Helicase E catalyzed displacement of the
cisplatin-damaged DNA oligonucleotide was inhibited by HMG-1 in a
concentration-dependent manner. Time course experiments revealed a decreased
rate of displacement in reactions containing HMG-1. The maximum inhibition
observed was 55% and taking into account that only 65% of the substrates had
HMG-1 bound, approximately 85% inhibition was observed on platinated DNA
substrates containing HMG-1. Inhibition of helicase activity was proportional to
the amount of substrate bound by HMG-1 based on the displacement and exonuclease
assays at varying HMG-1 concentrations. The ability of helicase E to displace an
undamaged DNA oligonucleotide from a cisplatin-damaged DNA template was also
inhibited by HMG-1. Interestingly, HMG-1 had no effect on the rate of
DNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis catalyzed by helicase E on the same DNA substrate.
The inhibition of helicase activity by HMG-1 binding cisplatin-damaged DNA
further supports a role for HMG-1 inhibiting DNA repair which may contribute to
cellular sensitivity to cisplatin.

PMID: 9427537 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR164: Dev Biol. 1997 Nov 15;191(2):284-96. 

A Drosophila kinesin-like protein, Klp38B, functions during meiosis, mitosis,
and segmentation.

Ruden DM, Cui W, Sollars V, Alterman M.

Department of Biochemistry, Cell, and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence 66045, USA. druden@kuhub.cc.ukans.edu

We show that klp38B, isolated as a mutation that dominantly prolongs blastoderm
mitotic cycles in Drosophila, encodes a Drosophila kinesin-like protein. Further
genetic analyses show that Klp38B not only functions during mitosis, but is also
required for meiosis and abdominal segmentation. Sequence comparisons suggest
that Klp38B encodes an amino-terminal microtubule motor domain, a central
alpha-helical coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal globular domain. Evidence
that Klp38B is required during meiosis is that flies transheterozygous for
mutations in both klp38B and nod have a high frequency of 4th chromosome meiotic
nondisjunction. Nod is a chromokinesin, a chromosome binding kinesin, that is
believed to provide astral-exclusion forces during the metaphase stage of
meiosis. Evidence that Klp38B is required during mitosis is that embryos from
female germline clones of klp38B mutations have holes in the cuticle similar to
a zygotic string (dCDC25) phenotype. Also, anti-Klp38B antibody injection into
precellularization blastoderm embryos causes developmental arrest and the
formation of circular mitotic figures. We speculate, based on these phenotypes,
that Klp38B is a chromokinesin that provides astral-exclusion forces on the
chromosomes during meiosis and mitosis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we have
identified an HMG-1 homologous region on Klp38B that could potentially bind
AT-rich DNA sequences. Finally, we show that klp38B mutations have defects in
abdominal segmentation, suggesting that Klp38B, like Xenopus chromokinesin
Xklp1, might be involved in polar granule formation.

PMID: 9398441 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR165: J Inorg Biochem. 1997 Oct;68(1):71-4. 

DNA binding studies with cis-dichlorobis
(5(6)-non/chlorosubstituted-2-hydroxymethyl-benzimidazole) platinum(II)
complexes.

Gumus F, Algul O.

Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Gazi University,
Etiler-Ankara, Turkey.

The DNA binding properties of two new platinum compounds, cis-[Pt(L)2Cl2]. 2H2O
where L is 5(6)-non/chlorosubstituted-2-hydroxymethylbenzimidazole, were
examined and compared with cisplatin. The platinum compounds (compounds I and
II) were used to modify DNA, which was then used in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays with the high mobility group (HMG)-do-main protein, HMG1. The DNA
platinated with these compounds was specifically recognized by HMG1. It was
concluded that the adducts formed by compounds I and II distort the DNA in a
manner similar to cisplatin diadducts.

PMID: 9379182 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR166: J Biochem (Tokyo). 1997 Sep;122(3):586-94. 

Difference in affinity for DNA between HMG proteins 1 and 2 determined by
surface plasmon resonance measurements.

Yamamoto A, Ando Y, Yoshioka K, Saito K, Tanabe T, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo,
Chiba.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 contain two similar but non-identical
repeats of DNA-binding domains and an acidic C-terminal. The proposed functions
of HMG proteins 1 and 2 imply a probable difference in their DNA-binding
abilities. The primary studies by gel retardation assay showed that HMG2 has
higher affinity than HMG1 for supercoiled and linear DNA. The DNA-binding of
HMG2 appeared strong enough to allow exchange with HMG1 molecule already bound
to DNA, while the DNA-binding region of HMG1 showed higher affinity than that of
HMG2. In order to compare more quantitatively the affinities, surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) measurements using a BIAcore instrument were conducted. The
kinetic data indicated that the Kd for the complex of HMG2 with DNA is smaller
than that of HMG1, in contrast to the situation for the DNA-binding region of
these proteins. The sequence between the second DNA-binding domain and the
acidic C-terminal of HMG proteins is required for tight DNA-binding. Also, the
acidic C-terminal strongly modulates the DNA-binding ability of each protein.
The usefulness of SPR measurement for quantitative analysis of affinity and
regions involved in DNA-binding under conditions nearly identical to those in
solution is discussed.

PMID: 9348088 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR167: Arthritis Rheum. 1997 Oct;40(10):1803-9. 

Antibodies against a peptide sequence located in the linker region of the
HMG-1/2 box domains in sera from patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

Jung F, Neuer G, Bautz FA.

University of Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To extend our work on the mapping of B cell epitopes on nucleosomal
high mobility group (HMG) proteins in the sera of patients with juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). METHODS: Seventy-seven pauciarticular-onset JRA
serum samples from antinuclear antibody (ANA)-positive patients and 42
polyarticular-onset JRA patient sera found to react with HMG-2 by immunoblotting
were used in this study. To identify B cell epitopes on HMG-2, recombinant HMG-2
protein fragments were used in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and in
competition ELISA experiments with a set of overlapping synthetic peptides. Fine
epitope mapping was achieved by oligopeptide synthesis, followed by
immunoblotting. RESULTS: Pauciarticular, but not polyarticular, JRA patient sera
were found to recognize a lysine-rich major epitope (KKGKKKDP), which is located
in the linker region of the HMG box domains of the HMG-2 nonhistone chromosomal
protein. No significant immunoreactions were observed in sera from ANA-negative
JRA patients and in sera from children with nonrheumatic diseases, indicating
that this epitope seems to be specific for pauciarticular-onset JRA. CONCLUSION:
In addition to our previous finding that JRA sera will react with a defined
epitope on HMG-17, pauciarticular JRA patient sera were also found to recognize
a defined epitope on the HMG-2 protein, thus suggesting the importance of this
epitope in the etiology of JRA.

PMID: 9336414 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR168: DNA Res. 1997 Jun 30;4(3):241-7. 

Difference in HMG1-induced DNA bending among microsatellites.

Takayanagi K, Mishima Y, Kominami R.

First Department of Biochemistry, Niigata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Sequence-dependency of high-mobility group protein (HMG) 1-induced DNA bending
is examined for microsatellites using a circularization assay which can measure
the extent of bending. Fragments of 133 bp containing (GGA/TCC)11 in the middle
showed greater bending than those harboring (GAA/TTC)11 and (GT/AC)17 repeats,
and fragments possessing (GA/TC)17 exhibited only slight bending. Differences
were not detected for fragments having the repeats near the end. Filter binding
assays showed no difference in their binding affinity, suggesting that GGA/TCC
repeats are more flexible than the other three repeats as concerns HMG1-induced
bending. These results suggest that the mammalian genomes comprise flexible and
inflexible regions of microsatellites which might play roles in chromatin
architectures and in dynamic packaging of genomic DNA during the cell division
cycle.

PMID: 9330912 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR169: Biochemistry. 1997 Sep 23;36(38):11428-36. 

Erratum in:
    Biochemistry 1997 Nov 11;36(45):13972.

DNA sequence context and protein composition modulate HMG-domain protein
recognition of cisplatin-modified DNA.

Dunham SU, Lippard SJ.

Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Proteins containing the high mobility group (HMG) DNA-binding domain form
specific complexes with cisplatin-modified DNA which shield the major
intrastrand d(GpG) and d(ApG) cross-links from excision repair. The molecular
basis for the specificity of binding was investigated for the two isolated
domains of HMG1 with a series of 15-bp oligonucleotides, d(CCTCTCN1G*G*N2TCTTC).
(GAAGAN3CCN4GAGAGG), where asterisks denote N7-modification of guanosine with
cisplatin. Alteration of the nucleotides flanking the platinum lesion modulated
HMG1domA recognition in this series by over 2 orders of magnitude and revealed
an unprecedented preference for N2 = dA > T > dC. The flanking nucleotide
preference for HMG1domB interaction with this oligonucleotide series was less
pronounced and had only a 20-fold range of binding affinities. For the N1 = N2 =
dA 15-bp probe, 100-fold stronger binding occurred with HMG1domA (Kd = 1.6 +/-
0.2 nM) compared to HMG1domB (Kd = 134 +/- 18 nM). The platinum-dependent
recognition of the N1 = N2 = dA 15-bp probe saturates at 1 equiv of HMG1domA and
is highly specific, as evidenced by the 1000-fold decrease in HMG1domA binding
affinity for the corresponding unplatinated oligonucleotide. HMG domains were
unable to bind specifically to cisplatin-modified DNA-RNA hybrids, revealing the
need for a deoxyribose sugar backbone for specific complex formation with
HMG-domain proteins. Protein-DNA contacts which may account for these observed
binding preferences are proposed, and potential implications for the biological
processing of cisplatin-DNA adducts are discussed.

PMID: 9298962 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR170: Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Sep 1;25(17):3523-31. 

Competition between HMG-I(Y), HMG-1 and histone H1 on four-way junction DNA.

Hill DA, Reeves R.

Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-4660, USA.

High mobility group proteins HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1, as well as histone H1, all
share the common property of binding to four-way junction DNA (4H), a synthetic
substrate commonly used to study proteins involved in recognizing and resolving
Holliday-type junctions formed during in vivo genetic recombination events. The
structure of 4H has also been hypothesized to mimic the DNA crossovers occurring
at, or near, the entrance and exit sites on the nucleosome. Furthermore, upon
binding to either duplex DNA or chromatin, all three of these nuclear proteins
share the ability to significantly alter the structure of bound substrates. In
order to further elucidate their substrate binding abilities, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays were employed to investigate the relative binding
capabilities of HMG-I(Y), HMG-1 and H1 to 4H in vitro. Data indicate a definite
hierarchy of binding preference by these proteins for 4H, with HMG-I(Y) having
the highest affinity (Kd approximately 6.5 nM) when compared with either H1 (Kd
approximately 16 nM) or HMG-1 (Kd approximately 80 nM). Competition/titration
assays demonstrated that all three proteins bind most tightly to the same site
on 4H. Hydroxyl radical footprinting identified the strongest site for binding
of HMG-I(Y), and presumably for the other proteins as well, to be at the center
of 4H. Together these in vitro results demonstrate that HMG-I(Y) and H1 are
co-dominant over HMG-1 for binding to the central crossover region of 4H and
suggest that in vivo both of these proteins may exert a dominant effect over
HMG-1 in recognizing and binding to altered DNA structures, such as Holliday
junctions, that have conformations similar to 4H.

PMID: 9254714 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR171: J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19763-70. 

Conformational changes of DNA induced by binding of Chironomus high mobility
group protein 1a (cHMG1a). Regions flanking an HMG1 box domain do not influence
the bend angle of the DNA.

Heyduk E, Heyduk T, Claus P, Wisniewski JR.

Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St. Louis
University Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins are thought to facilitate assembly of higher
order chromatin structure through modulation of DNA conformation. In this work
we investigate the bending of a 30-base pair DNA fragment induced by Chironomus
HMG1 (cHMG1a), and HMGI (cHMGI) proteins. The DNA bending was measured in
solution by monitoring the end-to-end distance between fluorescence probes
attached to opposite ends of the DNA fragment. The distance was measured by
fluorescence energy transfer using a novel europium chelate as a fluorescence
donor. These measurements revealed that the end-to-end distance in the 30-base
pair DNA was decreased from approximately 100 A in free DNA to approximately
50.5 A in cHMG1a. DNA complex. The most probable DNA bending angle consistent
with these distance measurements is about 150 degrees. The deletion of the
charged regulatory domains located close to the C terminus of the HMG1 box
domain of cHMG1a protein had no effect on the induced bend angle. The ability to
induce a large DNA bend distinguishes the cHMG1 from the cHMGI protein. Only
small perturbation of the DNA conformation was observed upon binding of the
cHMGI protein. A strong DNA bending activity of cHMG1a and its relative
abundance in the cell suggests that this protein plays a very important role in
modulation of chromatin structure.

PMID: 9242635 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR172: Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;17(8):4230-7. 

Mechanism of repression of RNA polymerase I transcription by the retinoblastoma
protein.

Voit R, Schafer K, Grummt I.

German Cancer Research Center, Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II,
Heidelberg.

The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product pRb restricts cellular
proliferation by affecting gene expression by all three classes of nuclear RNA
polymerases. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying pRb-mediated
repression of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription by RNA polymerase I, we have
analyzed the effect of pRb in a reconstituted transcription system. We
demonstrate that pRb, but not the related protein p107, acts as a
transcriptional repressor by interfering with the assembly of transcription
initiation complexes. The HMG box-containing transcription factor UBF is the
main target for pRb-induced transcriptional repression. UBF and pRb form in
vitro complexes involving the C-terminal part of pRb and HMG boxes 1 and 2 of
UBF. We show that the interactions between UBF and TIF-IB and between UBF and
RNA polymerase I, respectively, are not perturbed by pRb. However, the DNA
binding activity of UBF to both synthetic cruciform DNA and the rDNA promoter is
severely impaired in the presence of pRb. These studies reveal another mechanism
by which pRb suppresses cell proliferation, namely, by direct inhibition of
cellular rRNA synthesis.

PMID: 9234680 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR173: J Mol Biol. 1997 Jul 25;270(4):539-43. 

HMG1 protein inhibits the translesion synthesis of the major DNA cisplatin
adduct by cell extracts.

Hoffmann JS, Locker D, Villani G, Leng M.

Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, CNRS, 205 route de
Narbonne, Toulouse cedex, 31077, France.

When situated in a fork-like synthetic DNA replication substrate, the
1,2-intrastrand crosslink at the d(GpG) site, the most frequent adduct formed in
the reaction between DNA and the anticancer drug cisplatin
(cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)), is efficiently bypassed by eukaryotic cell
extracts. We show here that the rat high-mobility-group protein 1 (HMG1) binds
preferentially to the platinated fork-like synthetic DNA and inhibits the
translesion synthesis. The same protein, but without the acidic tail, inhibits
also the translesion synthesis. These results suggest that HMG proteins might
contribute to the sensitivity of cells to cisplatin by directly affecting DNA
replication.

PMID: 9245584 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR174: Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Jul;11(8):1009-19. 

High-mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-1 and TATA-binding protein-associated
factor TAF(II)30 affect estrogen receptor-mediated transcriptional activation.

Verrier CS, Roodi N, Yee CJ, Bailey LR, Jensen RA, Bustin M, Parl FF.

Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The estrogen receptor (ER) belongs to a family of ligand-inducible nuclear
receptors that exert their effects by binding to cis-acting DNA elements in the
regulatory region of target genes. The detailed mechanisms by which ER interacts
with the estrogen response element (ERE) and affects transcription still remain
to be elucidated. To study the ER-ERE interaction and transcription initiation,
we employed purified recombinant ER expressed in both the baculovirus-Sf9 and
his-tagged bacterial systems. The effect of high-mobility group (HMG) protein
HMG-1 and purified recombinant TATA-binding protein-associated factor TAF(II)30
on ER-ERE binding and transcription initiation were assessed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and in vitro transcription from an ERE-containing template
(pERE2LovTATA), respectively. We find that purified, recombinant ER fails to
bind to ERE in spite of high ligand-binding activity and electrophoretic and
immunological properties identical to ER in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. HMG-1
interacts with ER and promotes ER-ERE binding in a concentration- and
time-dependent manner. The effectiveness of HMG-1 to stimulate ER-ERE binding in
the electrophoretic mobility shift assay depends on the sequence flanking the
ERE consensus as well as the position of the latter in the oligonucleotide. We
find that TAF(II)30 has no effect on ER-ERE binding either alone or in
combination with ER and HMG-1. Although HMG-1 promotes ER-ERE binding, it fails
to stimulate transcription initiation either in the presence or absence of
hormone. In contrast, TAF(II)30, while not affecting ER-ERE binding, stimulates
transcription initiation 20-fold in the presence of HMG-1. These results
indicate that HMG-1 and TAF(II)30 act in sequence, the former acting to promote
ER-ERE binding followed by the latter to stimulate transcription initiation.

PMID: 9212049 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR175: J Exp Med. 1997 Jun 2;185(11):2025-32. 

V(D)J recombination: modulation of RAG1 and RAG2 cleavage activity on 12/23
substrates by whole cell extract and DNA-bending proteins.

Sawchuk DJ, Weis-Garcia F, Malik S, Besmer E, Bustin M, Nussenzweig MC, Cortes
P.

Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York 10021,
USA.

Antigen receptor gene rearrangement is directed by DNA motifs consisting of a
conserved heptamer and nonamer separated by a nonconserved spacer of either 12
or 23 base pairs (12 or 23 recombination signal sequences [RSS]). V(D)J
recombination requires that the rearranging DNA segments be flanked by RSSs of
different spacer lengths, a phenomenon known as the 12/23 rule. Recent studies
have shown that this restriction operates at the level of DNA cleavage, which is
mediated by the products of the recombination activating genes RAG1 and RAG2.
Here, we show that RAG1 and RAG2 are not sufficient for 12/23 dependent
cleavage, whereas RAG1 and RAG2 complemented with whole cell extract faithfully
recapitulates the 12/23 rule. In addition, HMG box containing proteins HMG1 and
HMG2 enhance RAG1- and RAG2-mediated cleavage of substrates containing 23 RSS
but not of substrates containing only 12 RSS. These results suggest the
existence of a nucleoprotein complex at the cleavage site, consisting of
architectural, catalytic, and regulatory components.

PMID: 9166431 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR176: EMBO J. 1997 May 15;16(10):2665-70. 

Stimulation of V(D)J cleavage by high mobility group proteins.

van Gent DC, Hiom K, Paull TT, Gellert M.

Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540,
USA.

V(D)J recombination requires a pair of signal sequences with spacer lengths of
12 and 23 bp between the conserved heptamer and nonamer elements. The RAG1 and
RAG2 proteins initiate the reaction by making double-strand DNA breaks at both
signals, and must thus be able to operate on these two different spatial
arrangements. We show that the DNA-bending proteins HMG1 and HMG2 stimulate
cleavage and RAG protein binding at the 23 bp spacer signal. These findings
suggest that DNA bending is important for bridging the longer spacer, and
explain how a similar array of RAG proteins could accommodate a signal with
either a 12 or a 23 bp spacer. An additional effect of HMG proteins is to
stimulate coupled cleavage greatly when both signal sequences are present,
suggesting that these proteins also aid the formation of a synaptic complex.

PMID: 9184213 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR177: Gene. 1997 May 6;190(2):303-7. 

Purification and cDNA cloning of maize HMGd reveal a novel plant chromosomal
HMG-box protein with sequence similarity to HMGa.

Grasser KD, Grimm R, Igloi GL.

Institut fur Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, Germany.
grasser@maize.biologie.uni-freiburg.de

We have purified the chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) protein HMGd from
maize suspension culture cells, determined the N-terminal amino acid (aa)
sequence, and isolated the corresponding cDNA. Sequence analysis showed that the
cDNA encoded a protein of 126 aa residues with a theoretical mass of 14,104 Da.
The protein contains an HMG-box DNA-binding domain and a short acidic C-terminal
tail. HMGd is in approx. 65% of its residues identical to maize HMGa, whereas it
is only approx. 46% identical to maize HMGcl/2. The differences to the
previously reported HMG proteins in aa sequence, in overall charge and in
protein size indicate that we have identified a third type of plant chromosomal
HMG-box protein belonging to the HMG1 protein family. Immunoblot analysis with a
HMGd antiserum reveals that HMGd is expressed in all tissues tested.

PMID: 9197548 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR178: Biochemistry. 1997 May 6;36(18):5418-24. 

Effect of nuclear protein HMG1 on in vitro slippage synthesis of the tandem
repeat dTG x dCA.

Gibb CL, Cheng W, Morozov VN, Kallenbach NR.

Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York 10003, USA.

Tandem repeats of simple doublet and triplet sequences occur with high frequency
in the DNA of eucaryotes. Among the most frequent is the repeat of dTG, which
has unusual structural properties. We show here that HMG1 (modeled by the second
HMG box motif from HMG1 of the rat, HMGb) binds to complexes formed from
annealing unequal lengths of dTG x dCA and inhibits the in vitro elongation of
these complexes by the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I at 37 degrees C. At
46 degrees C, HMGb enhances the elongation. Polylysine inhibits elongation at
both temperatures. These results show that the stability of this repeat in vivo
can be influenced by the presence of basic proteins in general, and more
selectively by the abundant nuclear protein HMG1.

PMID: 9154923 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR179: Cell. 1997 Apr 4;89(1):43-53. 

RAG1 and RAG2 form a stable postcleavage synaptic complex with DNA containing
signal ends in V(D)J recombination.

Agrawal A, Schatz DG.

Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8011, USA.

During V(D)J recombination, RAG1 and RAG2 cleave DNA adjacent to highly
conserved recombination signals, but nothing is known about the protein-DNA
complexes that exist after cleavage. Using a properly regulated in vitro V(D)J
cleavage system, together with nuclease sensitivity, mobility shift, and
immunoprecipitation experiments, we provide evidence that a stable complex is
formed postcleavage between synapsed recombination signals. This complex
includes the proteins RAG1, RAG2, HMG-1 or the closely related HMG-2 protein,
and the components of the DNA-dependent protein kinase. The existence of such a
stable complex explains a number of in vivo observations and suggests that
remodeling of postcleavage synaptic complexes is an important step in the
resolution of signal ends in V(D)J recombination.

PMID: 9094713 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR180: Plant J. 1997 Apr;11(4):703-15. 

High mobility group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind to a positive regulatory
region of the pea plastocyanin gene promoter.

Webster CI, Packman LC, Pwee KH, Gray JC.

Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, University of Cambridge, UK.

A 268 bp region (P268) of the pea plastocyanin gene promoter responsible for
high-level expression has been shown to interact with the high mobility group
proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y isolated from pea shoot chromatin. cDNAs encoding an
HMG-1 protein of 154 amino acid residues containing a single HMG-box and a
C-terminal acidic tail and an HMG-I/Y-like protein of 197 amino acid residues
containing four AT-hooks have been isolated and expressed in Escherichia coli to
provide large amounts of full-length proteins. DNase I footprinting identified
eight binding sites for HMG-I/Y and six binding sites for HMG-1 in P268.
Inhibition of binding by the antibiotic distamycin, which binds in the minor
groove of A/T-rich DNA, revealed that HMG-I/Y binding was 400-fold more
sensitive than HMG-1 binding. Binding-site selection from a pool of random
oligonucleotides indicated that HMG-I/Y binds to oligonucleotides containing
stretches of five or more A/T bp and HMG-1 binds preferentially to
oligonucleotides enriched in dinucleotides such as TpT and TpG.

PMID: 9161031 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR181: J Bacteriol. 1997 Apr;179(8):2757-60. 

Coactivation in vitro of the sigma54-dependent promoter Pu of the TOL plasmid of
Pseudomonas putida by HU and the mammalian HMG-1 protein.

Perez-Martin J, De Lorenzo V.

Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Madrid, Spain.

The mechanism by which the prokaryotic histone-like protein HU replaces the
integration host factor (IHF) in the coactivation of the sigma54-dependent
promoter Pu of Pseudomonas putida has been investigated. By using a preactivated
form of the cognate activator protein XylR, we show that the functional
replacement of IHF with HU previously suggested in vivo can be faithfully
reproduced in vitro with purified components. Furthermore, the coactivation
effect of IHF on Pu could be mimicked not only by HU but also by the mammalian
nonhistone chromatin protein HMG-1 and could be bypassed by intrinsically curved
DNA. These results suggest that either of two different mechanisms (generation
of a site-specific static DNA bend or a general flexibilization of the promoter
region) gives rise to the same structural effect of stimulating transcription
from Pu through changes in promoter architecture.

PMID: 9098077 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR182: J Gen Virol. 1997 Mar;78 ( Pt 3):665-70. 

Suppression of high mobility group protein T160 expression impairs mouse
cytomegalovirus replication.

Gariglio M, Foresta P, Sacchi C, Lembo M, Hertel L, Landolfo S.

Department of Medical Sciences, Medical School of Novara, University of Torino,
Italy.

The high mobility group (HMG-1) box proteins bind both non-B-DNA conformations
and specific nucleotide sequences. They have been implicated in a wide variety
of cellular functions involving DNA, such as transcription, replication and
recombination. To determine whether HMG-1 box protein T160 plays a role in virus
replication, we employed an antisense strategy to inhibit its expression in NIH
3T3 cells. The two T160 clones that expressed levels of T160 50% lower than
those expressed by clones transfected with the empty vector (Neo+ clones) were
investigated with respect to their permissiveness to the growth of viruses
representing three families: Rhabdoviridae, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV);
Picornaviridae, encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), and Alpha- and
Betaherpesviridae, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and mouse cytomegalovirus
(MCMV), respectively. They displayed a high degree of resistance to MCMV
replication, but were fully permissive to the other viruses. Competitive PCR and
probing IE-1 products by Western blot analysis showed that this resistance was
not due to depressed levels of virus adsorption during the early phases of
infection. We therefore conclude that T160 is involved in replication of the
betaherpesvirus MCMV.

PMID: 9049420 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR183: Int J Cancer. 1997 Feb 20;74(1):1-6. 

Expression of high-mobility group-1 mRNA in human gastrointestinal
adenocarcinoma and corresponding non-cancerous mucosa.

Xiang YY, Wang DY, Tanaka M, Suzuki M, Kiyokawa E, Igarashi H, Naito Y, Shen Q,
Sugimura H.

First Department of Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

An 1194-nucleotide complementary DNA clone, FM1, encoding a human high-mobility
group-1 protein (HMG-1) was isolated from a well-differentiated human
gastric-carcinoma cell line complementary DNA library by a differential
screening method. FM1 is similar to the published human HMG-1 in mature protein,
with only 3 different codons at positions 11, 149, and 190. We analyzed 33
gastric and colorectal adenocarcinomas for expression of the FM1 gene.
Northern-blot analysis revealed that all of the cancers expressed FM1 at a
higher level than in corresponding non-cancerous mucosa, with 2 transcripts of
approximately 1.4 and 2.4 kilobases. The FM1 expression level in the
non-cancerous tissues increased with the depth of accompanying cancer invasion.
Only 18.2% of well-differentiated cancers showed a higher expression level in
corresponding non-cancerous tissues, whereas the expression in corresponding
non-cancerous tissues was significantly higher in moderately (60%) and poorly
differentiated (83.3%) cancers. In situ hybridization demonstrated the location
of FM1 mRNA in well- and poorly differentiated gastric-cancer cells as well as
in non-cancerous tissue adjacent to poorly differentiated gastric cancer, but no
hybridization was detected in normal epithelial cells adjacent to
well-differentiated gastric cancer. These findings may provide new information
on HMG-1 mRNA expression in human gastrointestinal cancer and suggest a
correlation between FM1 mRNA expression to the differentiation and the stage of
human gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 9036861 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR184: J Mol Biol. 1997 Feb 14;266(1):66-75. 

The acidic tail of the high mobility group protein HMG-D modulates the
structural selectivity of DNA binding.

Payet D, Travers A.

Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

HMG-D is one of the Drosophila counterparts of the vertebrate HMG1/2 class of
abundant chromosomal proteins and contains three domains: an HMG domain followed
by a basic region and a short acidic carboxyterminal tail. We show that the HMG
domain of HMG-D does not bind to deformed DNA structures such as DNA bulges,
cis-platinated DNA or four-way junctions but does bind tightly to DNA
microcircles, suggesting that in vivo the natural ligands of this domain are
tightly bent DNA loops. The flanking basic region substantially increases the
DNA-binding activity of the HMG domain to DNA ligands other than microcircles.
We demonstrate that the acidic tail alters the structural selectivity of DNA
binding by increasing the affinity for deformed DNA and decreasing the affinity
for linear B-DNA. Finally, we show that the acidic tail increases the efficiency
of constraining preformed negative supercoils but conversely decreases the
efficiency of supercoiling relaxed DNA in the presence of topoisomerase I.

PMID: 9054971 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR185: Carcinogenesis. 1997 Feb;18(2):371-5. 

High mobility group proteins 1 and 2 recognize chromium-damaged DNA.

Wang JF, Bashir M, Engelsberg BN, Witmer C, Rozmiarek H, Billings PC.

Department of Pathology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6002, USA.

Chromium (Cr) is a human carcinogen and a potent DNA damaging agent. Incubation
of DNA with CrCl3 resulted in dose-dependent binding of Cr to DNA and, at
concentrations >20 microM, altered the electrophoretic mobility of a 100 bp
oligonucleotide. We also demonstrate that high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1
and 2 bind Cr-damaged DNA (Cr-DNA). Protein binding was lesion
density-dependent, with maximal binding to DNA treated with 100 microM CrCl3.
HMG2 binds to Cr-DNA with a calculated Kd of approximately 10(-9) M. These
proteins also bound DNA obtained from chromate-treated cells. These results
suggest that the covalent attachment of Cr to DNA induces alterations in DNA
structure which are recognized by HMG1 and HMG2. Therefore, these proteins may
function as Cr-damaged DNA recognition proteins in vivo and as a consequence of
binding, may play a role in directing the cellular response to Cr-DNA adduct
formation.

PMID: 9054631 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR186: Gene. 1997 Jan 15;184(2):285-90. 

The Drosophila DSP1 gene encoding an HMG 1-like protein: genomic organization,
evolutionary conservation and expression.

Canaple L, Decoville M, Leng M, Locker D.

Centre de Biophysique Moleculaire, CNRS, Orleans, France.

The gene that encodes the dorsal switch protein (DSP1) has been isolated from a
Drosophila melanogaster cosmid library. It is organized into seven exons and six
introns. The relative position of the introns within the region coding for the
high mobility group (HMG) domains are identical to those of vertebrate HMG 1/2
genes. The close similarity between DSP1 and HMG 1/2 genes strongly suggests
that these genes derived from a common ancestral gene. DSP1 encodes, at least,
two distinct mRNAs that differ in the length of their 5'-untranslated region and
coding sequence. Detailed sequence analysis shows that alternative splicing of
precursor mRNA gives rise to the two isoform mRNAs found in Drosophila cells.

PMID: 9031641 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR187: FEBS Lett. 1997 Jan 6;400(3):275-9. 

Secretion and binding of HMG1 protein to the external surface of the membrane
are required for murine erythroleukemia cell differentiation.

Passalacqua M, Zicca A, Sparatore B, Patrone M, Melloni E, Pontremoli S.

Institute of Biological Chemistry, University of Genoa, Italy.

We show here that murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, following induction with
hexamethylene bisacetamide, accumulate high mobility group (HMG)1 protein onto
the external surface of the cell in a membrane-associated form detectable by
immunostaining with a specific anti-HMG1 protein antibody. This association is
maximal at a time corresponding to cell commitment. At longer times,
immunostainable cells are progressively reduced and become almost completely
undetectable along with the appearance of hemoglobin molecules. Binding to MEL
cells does not affect the native molecular structure of HMG1 protein. The type
of functional correlation between HMG1 protein and MEL cell differentiation is
suggested by the observation that if an anti-HMG1 protein antibody is added at
the same time of the inducer almost complete inhibition of cell differentiation
is observed, whereas if the antibody is added within the time period in which
cells undergo through irreversible commitment, inhibition progressively
disappears. A correlation between MEL cell commitment and the biological effect
of HMG1 protein can thus be consistently suggested.

PMID: 9009213 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR188: Gene. 1997 Jan 3;184(1):99-105. 

Cloning and analysis of an HMG gene from the lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis: gene
duplication in vertebrate evolution.

Sharman AC, Hay-Schmidt A, Holland PW.

School of Animal and Microbial Sciences, The University of Reading,
Whiteknights, UK.

Evolution has shaped the organisation of vertebrate genomes, including the human
genome. To shed further light on genome history, we have cloned and analysed an
HMG gene from lamprey, representing one of the earliest vertebrate lineages.
Genes of the HMG1/2 family encode chromosomal proteins that bind DNA in a
non-sequence-specific manner, and have been implicated in a variety of cellular
processes dependent on chromatin structure. They are characterised by two copies
of a conserved motif, the HMG box, followed by an acidic C-terminal region. We
report here the cloning of a cDNA clone from the river lamprey Lampetra
fluviatilis containing a gene with two HMG boxes and an acidic tail; we
designate this gene LfHMG1. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that LfHMG1 is
descended from a gene ancestral to mammalian HMG1 and HMG2. This implies that
there was a duplication event in the HMG1/2 gene family, that occurred after the
divergence of the jawed and jawless fishes, 450 million years ago. This
conclusion supports and refines the hypothesis that there was a period of
extensive gene duplication early in vertebrate evolution. We also show that the
HMG1/2 family originated before the protostomes and deuterostomes diverged, over
525 million years ago.

PMID: 9016958 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR189: Clin Exp Immunol. 1997 Jan;107(1):135-40. 

Novel autoantigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(P-ANCA) in ulcerative colitis: non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2.

Sobajima J, Ozaki S, Osakada F, Uesugi H, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in sera from ulcerative colitis
(UC) patients have been described as reacting with proteins in the granules of
human neutrophils such as cathepsin G and lactoferrin and with yet unidentified
antigens. Here we report the existence of a new member of perinuclear ANCA
(P-ANCA) in UC patients. In the previous study, we found that UC patients had a
novel P-ANCA against neutrophil 28-kD protein. In this study, we purified the
same antigens from HL-60 lysates by using reversed phase high-performance liquid
chromatography, and revealed that the 28-kD antigen consisted of two different
proteins. The N-terminus amino acids of these proteins are identical with those
of high mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2.
Immunoblotting analysis of human neutrophil lysates using rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera revealed a single band of 28 kD, and the 28-kD band detected by
immunoblotting analysis using patient's serum IgG completely disappeared after
preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. Furthermore, rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera showed a perinuclear staining pattern in indirect immunofluorescence
studies using ethanol-fixed neutrophils. These data demonstrate that HMG1 and
HMG2 are novel target antigens of P-ANCA. HMGI and HMG2 are distributed in the
nuclei and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and act as transcription factors. Their
intracellular localization and functions are distinct from those of the
previously reported granular antigens of P-ANCA.

PMID: 9010268 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR190: J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 20;271(51):32900-6. 

Maize chromosomal HMGc. Two closely related structure-specific DNA-binding
proteins specify a second type of plant high mobility group box protein.

Grasser KD, Grimm R, Ritt C.

Institut fur Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg, Schanzlestrasse
1, D-79104 Freiburg, Federal Republic of Germany.
grasser@maize.biologie.uni-freiburg.de

The chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins are small and abundant
non-histone proteins common to eukaryotes. We have purified the maize HMGc
protein from immature kernels and characterized it by mass spectrometry and
amino acid sequence analysis. HMGc could be resolved into two similar proteins
by reversed phase chromatography. Cloning and characterization of the
corresponding cDNAs revealed that they encode two closely related maize HMGc
proteins, now termed HMGc1 and HMGc2. Their theoretical masses of 15,316 and
15,007 Da are >300 Da lower than the masses determined for the proteins purified
from maize, indicating post-translational modifications of the proteins. Despite
sequence similarity to maize HMGa (and previously described homologous proteins
of other species) amino acid sequence alignments reveal that HMGc is in several
conserved regions distinct from these proteins. Consequently, we have identified
a novel type of plant protein containing an HMG box DNA binding domain and
belonging to the HMG1 protein family. HMGc1 and HMGc2 were expressed in
Escherichia coli, purified to homogeneity, and analyzed for their DNA binding
properties. They proved to bind to DNA structure-specifically since they formed
complexes with DNA minicircles at concentrations approximately 100-fold lower
than the concentrations required to form complexes with linear fragments of
identical sequence. Furthermore, HMGc1 and HMGc2 can constrain negative
superhelical turns in plasmid DNA.

PMID: 8955131 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR191: EMBO J. 1996 Dec 16;15(24):7079-87. 

The transcriptional corepressor DSP1 inhibits activated transcription by
disrupting TFIIA-TBP complex formation.

Kirov NC, Lieberman PM, Rushlow C.

Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Transcriptional repression of eukaryotic genes is essential for many cellular
and developmental processes, yet the precise mechanisms of repression remain
poorly understood. The Dorsal Switch Protein (DSP1) was identified in a genetic
screen for activities which convert Dorsal into a transcriptional repressor.
DSP1 shares structural homology with the HMG-1/2 family and inhibits activation
by the rel transcription factors Dorsal and NF-kappaB in transfection studies.
Here we investigate the mechanism of transcriptional repression by DSP1. We
found that DSP1 protein can act as a potent transcriptional repressor for
multiple activator families in vitro and in transfection studies. DSP1 bound
directly to the TATA binding protein (TBP), and formed a stable ternary complex
with TBP bound to DNA. DSP1 preferentially disrupted the DNA binding of TBP
complexes containing TFIIA and displaced TFIIA from binding to TBP. Consistent
with the inhibition of TFIIA-bound complexes, DSP1 was shown to inhibit
activated but not basal transcription reactions in vitro. The ability of DSP1 to
interact with TBP and to repress transcription was mapped to the
carboxy-terminal domain which contains two HMG boxes. Our results support the
model that DSP1 represses activated transcription by interfering with the
binding of TFIIA, a general transcription factor implicated in activated
transcription pathways.

PMID: 9003783 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR192: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Dec;141(2):532-9. 

Differential binding of HMG1, HMG2, and a single HMG box to cisplatin-damaged
DNA.

Farid RS, Bianchi ME, Falciola L, Engelsberg BN, Billings PC.

Department of Pathology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104, USA.

The HMG box domain is a DNA binding domain present in the nonhistone chromosomal
proteins HMG1 and HMG2 and in other proteins involved in the regulation of gene
expression. Previous studies have demonstrated that HMG1 and HMG2 bind with high
affinity to DNA modified with the cancer chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin (CDDP).
In this report, we compare the binding of full-length HMG1 and HMG2 and the HMG
boxes present in these proteins to that of CDDP-DNA. Complexes between HMG1,
HMG2, or HMG Box A + B and CDDP-DNA were stable at > or = 500 mM salt, while
complexes between a single HMG box and CDDP-DNA exhibited decreased stability.
Analysis of a series of HMG1 Box A mutant constructs revealed different
affinities for CDDP-DNA. Two constructs containing a Phe to Ala substitution at
position 19 and a Tyr to Gly substitution at position 71, are noteworthy; these
peptides exhibited reduced affinity for CDDP-DNA. We have generated a structure
of HMG1 Box A and used it, along with the results of our binding studies, to
model its interaction with CDDP-DNA. HMG1 Box A binds in the minor groove of
CDDP-DNA, in agreement with earlier studies. Our model predicts that Tyr71
partially intercalates and forms an H bond with the sugar-phosphate backbone.
The model also suggests that Phe 19 does not directly interact with DNA, and
hence an Ala substitution at position 19 may alter protein structure. This model
should provide a framework for future studies examining HMG Box-DNA
interactions.

PMID: 8975778 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR193: Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 1;24(23):4733-40. 

A novel activity of HMG domains: promotion of the triple-stranded complex
formation between DNA containing (GGA/TCC)11 and d(GGA)11 oligonucleotides.

Suda T, Mishima Y, Takayanagi K, Asakura H, Odani S, Kominami R.

First Department of Biochemistry, Niigata University School of Medicine, Japan.

The high mobility group protein (HMG)-box is a DNA-binding domain found in many
proteins that bind preferentially to DNA of irregular structures in a
sequence-independent manner and can bend the DNA. We show here that GST-fusion
proteins of HMG domains from HMG1 and HMG2 promote a triple-stranded complex
formation between DNA containing the (GGA/TCC)11 repeat and oligonucleotides of
d(GGA)11 probably due to G:G base pairing. The activity is to reduce association
time and requirements of Mg2+ and oligonucleotide concentrations. The HMG box of
SRY, the protein determining male-sex differentiation, also has the activity,
suggesting that it is not restricted to the HMG-box domains derived from HMG1/2
but is common to those from other members of the HMG-box family of proteins.
Interestingly, the box-AB and box-B of HMG1 bend DNA containing the repeat, but
SRY fails to bend in a circularization assay. The difference suggests that the
two activities of association-promotion and DNA bending are distinct. These
results suggest that the HMG-box domain has a novel activity of promoting the
association between GGA repeats which might be involved in higher-order
architecture of chromatin.

PMID: 8972860 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR194: Cancer Res. 1996 Dec 1;56(23):5330-3. 

Enhanced coexpression of thioredoxin and high mobility group protein 1 genes in
human hepatocellular carcinoma and the possible association with decreased
sensitivity to cisplatin.

Kawahara N, Tanaka T, Yokomizo A, Nanri H, Ono M, Wada M, Kohno K, Takenaka K,
Sugimachi K, Kuwano M.

Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Maidashi,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Thioredoxin (TRX), a disulfide-reducing intracellular protein, functions as a
cellular defense mechanism against oxidative stress. In this study, we asked
whether expression of TRX, glutathione-thiol transferase pi, and high mobility
group protein 1 (HMG-1) genes is enhanced in human hepatocellular carcinoma and
whether expression of these genes is associated with sensitivity to cisplatin.
Both TRX and HMG-1 were co-overexpressed in almost all cancerous lesions in
comparison to normal tissue in surgically resected hepatocellular carcinomas of
20 patients. Tumor sensitivity to cisplatin [cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)],
but not to mitomycin C or doxorubicin, correlated with mRNA levels of TRX in
cancer tissue. TRX and HMG-1 may be useful tumor markers, and TRX might be also
a useful marker for sensitivity to cisplatin in human hepatocellular carcinomas.

PMID: 8968078 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR195: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13623-8. 

PCR-based development of DNA substrates containing modified bases: an efficient
system for investigating the role of the exocyclic groups in chemical and
structural recognition by minor groove binding drugs and proteins.

Bailly C, Payet D, Travers AA, Waring MJ.

Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

DNA molecules containing inosine in place of guanosine and/or 2,6-diaminopurine
in place of adenine have been synthesized and tested as substrates for binding
of sequence-selective ligands, both small and large. Footprinting patterns
reveal that the binding sites for AT- or GC-specific antibiotics (distamycin or
mithramycin, respectively) are completely changed in the modified DNAs, as
expected for direct sequence readout involving contact with the purine 2-amino
group. However, we also find large changes in the binding of HMG-D, a member of
the HMG-1 family of chromosomal proteins, pointing to an indirect influence of
the exocyclic amino group on ligand binding via an effect on the deformability
of the double helix. This interpretation is confirmed by the finding that
deoxyuridine-containing poly- and oligonucleotides, which lack the exocyclic
methyl group of thymidine in the major groove, interact 5-10 times more strongly
with HMG-D than do their counterparts containing natural nucleotides.

PMID: 8942984 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR196: Hum Reprod. 1996 Nov;11(11):2400-4. 

Pure and highly purified follicle-stimulating hormone alone or in combination
with human menopausal gonadotrophin for ovarian stimulation after pituitary
suppression in in-vitro fertilization.

Balasch J, Fabregues F, Creus M, Moreno V, Puerto B, Penarrubia J, Carmona F,
Vanrell JA.

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Barcelona, Hospital Clinic i Provincial, Spain.

The use of pure follicle stimulating hormone (pFSH) and highly purified FSH
(FSH-HP) versus the combinations pFSH/human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) and
FSH HP/HMG, respectively, was compared for stimulating follicular development
after gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) suppression in women
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF)-embryo transfer. Two consecutive
prospective, randomized studies were carried out at the Assisted Reproduction
Unit of the Hospital Clinic i Provincial in Barcelona, a tertiary care setting.
Two groups of 188 (study 1) and 252 (study 2) consecutive infertile patients
respectively, scheduled for IVF-embryo transfer were included. Pretreatment with
leuprolide acetate (long protocol) was followed by gonadotrophin treatment in
all patients. In study 1, 92 patients received i.m. pFSH alone (group pFSH) and
96 were treated with the combination of i.m. pFSH and i.m. HMG (group HMG-1). In
study 2, 123 patients received s.c. FSH-HP alone (group FSH-HP) and 129 patients
were given the combination of s.c. FSH-HP and i.m. HMG (group HMG-2). Main
outcome measures included follicular development, oocyte retrieval, fertilized
oocytes, duration and dose of gonadotrophin therapy, and clinical pregnancy.
There were no significant differences between pFSH and pFSH/HMG nor between
FSH-HP and FSH-HP/HMG cycles with regard to the number of ampoules of medication
used, day of human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) administration, mean peak serum
oestradiol concentrations, number of follicles punctured, and number of oocytes
aspirated, embryos transferred, or pregnancies. We conclude that urinary FSH
(either purified of highly purified) alone is as effective as the conventional
combination of urinary FSH/HMG for ovarian stimulation under pituitary
suppression in IVF cycles. Therefore, they can be used interchangeably in IVF
programmes.

Publication Types:
    Clinical Trial
    Randomized Controlled Trial

PMID: 8981119 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR197: Clin Exp Immunol. 1996 Nov;106(2):389-95. 

Primary pulmonary hypertension: immunogenetic response to high-mobility group
(HMG) proteins and histone.

Morse JH, Barst RJ, Fotino M, Zhang Y, Flaster E, Fritzler MJ.

Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

HLA class II alleles (DNA typing) and antibodies to HMG-1,2,14,17 proteins and
H1 histone were determined in three predominantly Caucasian groups of patients
with pulmonary hypertension (PHT). Forty-four adults had primary pulmonary
hypertension (PPH), 42 children had PPH, and 41 children had PHT associated with
anatomically large congenital pulmonary to systemic shunts (PHT + shunt). The
HLA class II alleles in the Caucasian patients were compared with those of 51
healthy Caucasian controls. Eight (18%) of 44 sera from adults with PPH bound
HMG-14 and 23 (52%) bound H1. None of 42 sera from children with PPH bound
either HMG-14/17 or HMG-1/2, whereas four (10%) bound H1. In the PHT + shunt
group of 41 children, two (5%) bound HMG-14, one (3%) bound HMG-17, four (10%)
bound HMG-1 and/or HMG-2, and six (15%) bound H1. Among the 12 HMG
antibody-positive patients, HLA-DQ6 was present in nine of 10 HLA typed patients
(six PPH adults and three PHT + shunt children), seven of whom had antibodies to
HMG-14 and one to HMG-17. The 100% frequency of HLA-DQ6 in seven Caucasian
patients with antibodies to HMG-14/17 was statistically significant when
compared with the 41% frequency of -DQ6 present in 51 healthy Caucasian controls
(pc = 0.027, pc = Bonferroni correction, OR = 21.3). In contrast, when compared
with controls, 25 patients with PPH and anti-H1 antibodies (21 adults and four
children) had increased frequencies of HLA-DQ7 and -DR5 (60% versus 29%, P =
0.010, OR = 3.6 and 48% versus 22%, P = 0.018, OR = 3.4), which were not
significant after correction. In essence, antibodies to HMG-14 and to H1
proteins were present predominantly in adults with PPH, suggesting that the
pattern of response to HMG-14/17 was similar to that previously reported in
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and drug-induced autoimmunity. This is the
first report of an association between autoantibodies directed against HMG and
H1 with immunogenetic markers. These data suggest that a subset of patients with
PPH may have an autoimmune disease.

PMID: 8918589 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR198: Mol Immunol. 1996 Oct;33(14):1119-25. 

The conserved lymphokine element-0 in the IL5 promoter binds to a high mobility
group-1 protein.

Marrugo J, Marsh DG, Ghosh B.

Division of Clinical Immunology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21224, U.S.A.

The conserved lymphokine elements-0 (CLE0) in the IL5 promoter is essential for
the expression of IL-5. Here, we report the cloning and expression of a cDNA
encoding a novel CLE0-binding protein, CLEBP-1 from a mouse Th2 clone, D10.G4.1.
Interestingly, it was found that the CLEBP1 cDNA sequence was almost identical
to the sequences of known high mobility group-1 (HMG1) cDNAs. When expressed as
a recombinant fusion protein in Escherichia coli, CLEBP-1 was shown to bind to
the IL5-CLE0 element in electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) and
southwestern blot analysis. The CLEBP-1 fusion protein cross-reacts with
and-HMG-1/2 in Western blot analysis. It also binds to the CLE0 elements of IL4,
GMCSF and GCSF genes. CLEBP-1 and closely related HMG-1 and HMG-2 proteins may
play key roles in facilitating the expression of the lymphokine genes that
contain CLE0 elements.

PMID: 9047378 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR199: Nippon Rinsho. 1996 Oct;54(10):2829-38. 

[Development of non-viral gene delivery system and its applications]

[Article in Japanese]

Kaneda Y.

Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University.

Non-viral gene transfer methods have been developed as well as viral vectors
toward gene therapy and in vivo analysis of diseases. Among non-viral vectors,
cationic liposome-mediated gene transfer is well-established and widely used,
but still inefficient for in vivo gene delivery. We developed a nobel liposome
using fusion proteins of HVJ (Sendai virus) and nuclear protein, HMG 1. Using
this delivery system, we succeeded in inducing glomerulosclerosis and lung
fibrosis in rat, developed several strategies for gene therapy of restenosis of
artery. Besides liposome, receptor-mediated gene transfer has been developed and
improved for targeted gene delivery. Recently, devices for particle bombardment
have been developed as gene-gun. Naked DNA without vector system was also
available for gene expression in muscles.

Publication Types:
    Review
    Review, Tutorial

PMID: 8914452 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



NR200: J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1996 Oct;14(2):235-8. 

HMG box proteins interact with multiple tandemly repeated (GCC)n (GGC)m DNA
sequences.

Zhao Y, Cheng W, Gibb CL, Gupta G, Kallenbach NR.

Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York 10003, USA.

A number of tandemly repeated DNA sequences have the ability to form hairpin
structures by forming non-standard base pairs. When (GCC)15 and (GGC)15 strands
are annealed together, the expected duplex is the only product. However, when
(GCC)15 is annealed with (GCC)10, depending on the relative concentrations, up
to five complexes can be detected in native gels. Three of these species are
susceptible to limited digestion by Exo VII, suggesting they are duplexes
containing single stranded tails. The remaining two bands are resistant to the
enzyme, and have low mobility on native gels, consistent with branched
structures. The latter complexes bind HMG box proteins, members of a highly
abundant class of non-histone proteins of the nucleus. These proteins, modeled
in this study by the second box fragment from rat HMG1, HMGb, interact strongly
with branched or chemically modified DNA, relative to normal duplexes. The
expansion of triplet repeats in genomic DNA is associated with tumor formation
as well with a variety of heritable neurologiocal disorders. It is our thesis
that the stability of branched intermediate structures that arise in replication
of these sequences and promote expansion can be influenced directly by the
presence of two highly abundant proteins in the cell nucleus: the HMG box
proteins, HMG1/2, and the histone H1, which associates with HMG1/2.

PMID: 8913860 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


